GANAPATI, THE SCRIBE
BHAGA VAN VYASA, the celebrated compiler of the Vedas, was the son of
the great sage Parasara. It was he who gave to the world the divine epic of
the Mahabharata.
Having conceived the Mahabharata he thought of the means of giving the
sacred story to the world. He meditated on Brahma, the Creator , who
manifested hims elf before him. Vyasa saluted him with bowed head and
folded hands and prayed:
“Lord, I have conceived an excellent work, but cannot think of one who can
take it down to my dictation.”
Brahma extolled  Vyasa and said: “O sage, invoke Ganapati and beg him to
be your amanuensis” Having said these words he disappeared. The sage
Vyasa meditated  on Ganapati who appeared before him. Vyasa received him
with due respect and sought his aid.
“Lord Ganapati, I shall dictate the story of the Mahabharata and I pray you
to be graciously pleased to write it down.”
Ganapati replied : “Very well. I shall do as you wish. But my pen must not
stop while I am writing. So you must dictate without pause or hesitation. I
can only write on this condition.”
Vyasa agreed, guarding himself,  however , with a counter stipulation: “Be it
so, but you must first grasp the meaning of what I dictate before you write it
down.”
Ganapati smiled and agreed to the condition. Then the sage began to sing
the story of the Mahabharata. He would occasionally compose some
complex stanzas  which would make Ganapati pause a while to get at the
meaning and Vyasa would avail himself of this interval to compose many
stanzas in his mind. Thus the Mahabharata came to be written by Ganapati
to the dictation of V yasa.
It was before the days of printin g, when the memory of the learned was the
sole repository of books. Vyasa first taught the great epic to his son, thesage Suka. Later, he expounded it to many other disciples. Were it not so,
the book might have been lost to future generations.
Tradition has it that Narada told the story of the Mahabharata to the devas
while Suka taught it to the gand harvas, the rakshasas and the yakshas. It is
well known that the virtuous and learned Vaisampayana, one of the chief
disciples of Vyasa, revealed the epic for the benefit of humanity .
Janamejaya, the son of the great King Parikshit, conducted a great sacrifice
in the course of which Vaisampa yana narrated the story at the request of the
former . Afterwards, this story , as told by V aisampayana, was recited by Suta
in the forest of Naimisa to an assembly of sages under the lead of the Rishi
Saunaka.
Suta addressed the assembly: “I had the good fortune to hear the story of
the Mahabharat a composed by Vyasa to teach humanity dharma and the
other ends of life. I should like to narrate it to you." At these words the
ascetics eagerly gathered round him.
Suta continued: “I heard the main story of the Mahabharata and the episodic
tales contained thereiry told by Vaisampayana at the sacrifice conducted by
King Janamejaya. Afterwards, I made an extensive pilgrimage to various
sacred places and also visited the battlefield where the great battle described
in the epic was fought. I have now come here to meet you all.” He then
proceeded to tell the whole story of the Mahabharata in the grand assembly .
After the death of the great King Santanu, Chitrangada became King of
Hastinapura and he was succeeded by Vichitravirya. The latter had two sons
- Dhritarashtra and Pandu. The elder of the two being born blind, Pandu, the
younger brother , ascende d the throne. In the course of his reign, Pandu
committed a certain offence and had to resort to the forest with his two
wives where he spent many years in penance.
During their stay in the forest, the two wives of Pandu, Kunti and Madri,
gave birth to five sons who became well- known as the five Pandavas.
Pandu passed away while they were still living in the forest. The sages
brought up the five Pandavas during their early years.
When Yudhishthira, the eldest, attained the age of sixteen the rishis led
them all back to Hastinapura and entrusted them to the old grandsireBhishma.
In a short time the Pandavas gained mastery over the Vedas and the Vedanta
as well as over the various arts, especially pertaining to the kshatriyas. The
Kauravas, the sons of the blind Dhritarashtra, became jealous of the
Pandavas and tried to injure them in various ways.
Finally Bhishma, the head of the family , intervened to bring about mutual
understanding and peace betwee n them. Accordingly the Pandavas and the
Kauravas began to rule separately from their respective capitals,
Indraprastha and Hastinapura.
Some time later, there was a game of dice between the Kaura vas and the
Pandavas accord ing to the then prevailing kshatriya code of honour. Sakuni,
who played on behalf of the Kauravas, defeated Yudhishthira. As a result,
the Pandavas had to be in exile for a period of thirteen years. They left the
kingdom and went to the forest with their devoted wife Draupadi.
According to the conditions of the game, the Pandavas spent twelve years in
the forest and the thirteenth year incognito. When they returned and
demanded of Duryodhana their paternal heritage, the latter , who had in the
meanwhile usurped their kingdom, refused to return it. War followed as a
consequence. The Pandavas defeated Duryodhana and regained their
patrimony .
The Pandavas ruled the kingdom for thirty-six years. Afterwards, they
transferred the crown to their grandson, Parikshit, and repaired to the forest
with Draupadi, all clad humbly in barks of trees.
This is the substance of the story of the Mahabharata. In this ancient and
wonderful epic of our land there are many illustrative tales and sublime
teachings, besid es the narrative of the fortunes of the Pandavas. The
Mahabharata is in fact a verita ble ocean containing countless  pearls and
gems. It is, with the Ramayana, a living fountain of the ethics and culture of
our Motherland.CHAPTER I: DEVAVRATA
“YOU must certainly become my wife, whoever you may be.” Thus said
the great King Santanu to the goddess Ganga who stood before him in
human form, intoxicating his senses with her superhuman loveliness.
The king earnestly offered for her love his kingdom, his wealth, his all, his
very life.
Ganga replied: “O king, I shall become your wife. But on certain conditions
- that neither you nor anyone else should ever ask me who I am, or whence
I come. You must also not stand in the way of whatever I do, good or bad,
nor must you ever be wroth with me on any account whatsoever . You must
not say anything displeasing to me. If you act otherwise, I shall leave you
then and there. Do you agree?”
The infatuated king vowed his assent, and she became his wife and lived
with him.
The heart of the king was captivated by her modesty and grace and the
steady love she bore him. King  Santanu and Ganga lived a life of perfect
happiness, oblivious of the passage of time.
She gave birth to many children; each new-born baby she took to the
Ganges and cast into the river, and then returned to the king with a smiling
face.
Santanu was filled with horror and anguish at such fiendish conduct, but
suffered it all in silence, mindful of the promise he had made. Often he
wondered who she was, wherefrom she had come and why she acted like a
murderous witch; still bound by his word, and his all-mastering love for her ,
uttered no word of blame or remonstrance.
Thus she killed seven children. When the eighth child was born and she was
about to throw it into the Ganges, Santanu could not bear it any longer .
He cried: “Stop, stop, why are you bent on this horrid and unnat ural murder
of your own innocent babes?” W ith this outburst the king restrained her .“O great king,” she replied, “you have forgotten your promise, for your
heart is set on your child, and you do not need me any more. I go. I shall not
kill this child, but listen to my story before you judge me. I, who am
constrained to play this hatefu l role by the curse of Vasishtha, am the
goddess Ganga, adored of gods and men. Vasishtha cursed the eight Vasus
to be born in the world of men and moved by their supplications  said, I was
to be their moth er. I bore them to you, and well is it for you that it was so,
for you will go to higher regions for this service you have done to the eight
Vasus. I shall bring up this last child of yours for some time and then return
it to you as my gift.” After saying these words the goddess disappeared with
the child. It was this child who later became famous as Bhishma.
This was how the Vasus came to incur Vasishtha’ s curse: they went for a
holiday with their wives to a mountain tract where stood the hermitage of
Vasishtha. One of them saw Vasishtha’ s cow, Nandini, grazin g there. Its
divinely beautiful form attracted him and he pointed it out to the ladies.
They were all loud in praise of the graceful animal, and one of them
requested her husband to secure it for her .
He replied: “Wh at need have we, the devas, for the milk of cows? This cow
belongs to the sage Vasishtha who is the master of the whole place. Man
will certainly become immortal  by drinking its milk; but this is no gain to
us, who are already immortal. Is it worth our while incurring Vasishtha’ s
wrath merely to satisfy a whim? ”
But she was not thus to be put off. “I have a dear companion in the mortal
world. It is for her sake that I make this request. Before Vasishtha returns
we shall have escaped with the cow. You must certainly do this for my sake,
for it is my dearest wish.” Finally her husband yielded. All the Vasus joined
together and took the cow and its calf away with them.
When Vasishtha returned to his ashrama, he missed the cow and the calf,
because they were indispensable for his daily rituals. Very soon he came to
know by his yogic insight all that had taken place. Anger seized  him and he
uttered a curse against the Vasus. The sage, whose sole wealth was his
austerity , willed  that they shoul d be born into the world of men. When the
Vasus came to know of the curse, repentant too late, they threw  themselves
on the sage’ s mercy and implored for giveness.Vasishtha said: “The curse must needs take its course. Prabhasa, the Vasu
who seized the cow. will live long in the world in all glory , but the others
will be freed from the curse as soon as born. My words cannot prove
ineffective, but I shall soften the curse to this extent." Afterward s Vasishthh
set his mind again on his austerities, the effect of which had been slightly
impaired by his anger . Sages who perform austerities acquire the power to
curse, but every exercise of this power reduces their store of merit.
The Vasus felt relieved and approached the goddess Ganga and begged of
her: “We pray you to become our mother . For our sake we beseech you to
descend to the earth and marry a worthy man. Throw us into the water as
soon as we are born and liberate us from the curse." The goddess granted
their prayer , came to the earth and became the wife of Santanu.
When the goddess Ganga left Santanu and disappeared with the eighth
child, the king gave up all sensual pleasures and ruled the kingdom in a
spirit of asceticism. One day he was wandering along the banks of the
Ganges when he saw a boy endowed with the beauty and form of Devendra,
the king of the gods. The child  was amusing himself by castin g a dam of
arrows across the Ganges in flood, playing with the mighty river as a child
with an indulgent mother . To the king who stood transfixed with amazement
at the sight, the goddess Ganga revealed herself and presented the child as
his own son.
She said: “O king, this is that eighth child I bore you. I have brought him up
till now. His name is Devavrata.  He has mastered the art of arms  and equals
Parasurama in prowess. He has learnt the Vedas and the Vedanta from
Vasishtha, and is well versed in the arts and sciences known to Sukra. Take
back with you this child who is a great archer and hero as well as a master
in statec raft.” Then she blessed the boy, handed him to his father, the king,
and disappeared.CHAPTER II: BHlSHMA’S VOW
WITH joy the king received to his heart and his kingdom the resplendent
and youthful prince Devavrata and crowned him as the yuvara ja, the heir
apparent.
Four years went by. One day as the king was wandering on the banks of the
Yarnuna, the air was suddenly filled with a fragrance so divinely sweet that
the king sought for its cause, and he traced it to a maiden so lovely that she
seemed a goddess. A sage had conferred on her the boon that a divine
perfume should emanate from her, and this was now pervadin g the whole
forest.
From the mome nt the goddess Ganga left him, the king had kept his senses
under control, but the sight of this divinely beautiful maiden burst the bonds
of restra int and filled him with an overmastering desire. He asked her to be
his wife.
The maiden said: “I am a fisherwoman, the daughter of the chief of the
fishermen. May it please you to ask him and get his consent” Her voice was
sweet as her form.
The father was an astute man.
He said: “O king, there is no doubt that this maiden, like every other , has to
be marri ed to someone and you are indeed worthy of her. Still you have to
make a promise to me before you can have her .”
Santanu replied: “If it is a just promise I shall make it.”
The chief of the fisherfolk said: “The child born of this maiden should be
the king after you."
Though almost mad with passio n, the king could not make this promise, as
it meant setting aside the godlike Devavrata, the son of Ganga, who was
entitled to the crown. It was a price that could not be thought of without
shame. He therefore returned to his capital, Hastinapura, sick with bathed
desire. He did not reveal the matter to anyone and languished in silence.One day Devavr ata asked his father: “My father , you have all that the heart
could wish. Why then are you so unhappy? How is it that you are like one
pining away with a secret sorrow?”
The king replied: “Dear son, what you say is true. I am indeed tortured with
mental pain and anxiety . You are my only son and you are always
preoccupied with military ambitions. Life in the world is uncertain and wars
are incessant. If anything untoward befalls you our family will become
extinct. Of course, you are equal to a hundred sons. Still, those who are
well-read in the scriptures say that in this transitory world having but one
son is the same as having no son at all. It is not proper that the perpetuation
of our family should depend on a single life, and above all things I desire
the perpetuation of our family . This is the cause of my anguish. ” The father
prevaricated, being ashamed to reveal the whole story to his sons.
The wise Devav rata realised that there must be a secret cause for the mental
condition of his father , and questioning the king’ s charioteer , came to know
of his meeting with the fishermaiden on the banks of the Yamuna. He went
to the chief of fishermen and besought his daughter ’s hand on his father's
behalf.
The fisherman was respectful, but firm: “My daughter is indeed fit to be the
king’ s spouse; then should not her son become king? But you have been
crowned as the heir - apparent and will naturally succeed your father . It is
this that stands in the way .”
Devavrata replie d: “I give you my word that the son born of this maiden
shall be king, and I renounce in his favour my right as heir- apparent,” and
he took a vow to that ef fect.
The chief of the fishermen said:  “O best of the Bharata race, you have done
what no one else born of royal blood has done till now. You are indeed a
hero. You can yourself conduct my daughter to the king, your father . Still,
hear with patience these words of mine which I say as the father of the girl.
I have no doubt you will keep  your word, but how can I hope that the
children born of you will renounce their birthright? Your sons will naturally
be mighty heroes like you, and will be hard to resist if they seek to seize the
kingdom by force. This is the doubt that torments me.”When he heard this knotty question posed by the girl‘s father , Devavrata,
who was bent on fulfilling the king's desire, made his supreme renunciation.
He vowed with upraised arm to the father of the maiden: “I shall never
marry and I dedicate myself to a life of unbroken chastity .” And as he
uttered these words of renunciat ion the gods showered flowers on his head
and cries of “Bhishma.” “Bhishma” resounded in the air. “Bhishma” means
one who undert akes a terrible vow and fulfils it. That name became the
celebrated epith et of Devavrata from that time. Then the son of Ganga led
the maiden Satyavati to his father .
Two sons were born of Satyavati to Santanu, Chitrangada and Vichitravirya,
who ascended the throne one after the other . Viehitravirya had two sons,
Dhritarashtra and Pandu, born respectively of his two queens. Ambika and
Ambalika. The sons of Dhritarashtra, a hundred in number , were known as
the Kauravas. Pandu had five sons who became famous as the Panduvas.
Bhishma lived long, honoured by all as the pater -familias until the end of
the famous battle of Kurukshetra.
The Family T ree
CHAPTER III: AMBA AND BHISHMA
CHITRANGADA, the son of Satyavati, was killed in battle with a
gandharva. As he died childless, his brother , Vichitravirya, was the rightful
heir and was duly crowned king, and as he was a minor , Bhishma governed
the kingdom in his name till he came of age.
When Vichitravirya reached adolescence Bhishma cast about for a bride for
him, and as he heard that the daughters of the king of Kasi were to choose
their husbands according to the ancient kshatriya practice he went there to
secure them for his brother . The rulers of Kosla, Vanga, Pundra, Kalinga
and other princes and potent ates had also repaired to Kasi for the
swayamvara, attired in their best. The princesses were so far-famed for
beauty and accomplishments that there was fierce competition to win them.
Bhishma was famous among the kshatriyas as a mighty man- at-arms. At
first everyone thought that the redoubtable hero had come merel y to witness
the festivities of the swayamvara, but when they found that he was also a
suitor , the young  princes felt themselves let down and were full of chagrin.
They did not know that he had really come for the sake of his brother ,
Vichitravirya.
The princes began to cast affronts at Bhishma: “This most excellent and
wise descendant of the Bharata race forgets that he is too old and forgets
also his vow of celibacy . What has this old man to do with this
swayamvara’? Fie on him!" The princesses who were to choose their
husbands barely glanced at the old man and looked away .
Bhishma’ s wrath  flamed up. He challenged the assembled princes to a trial
of their manhood and defeated them all, and taking the three princesses in
his chariot he set out for Hastina pura. But before he had gone far, Salva, the
king of the Saubalu country who was attached to Amba, intercepted and
opposed him, for that princess had mentally chosen Salva as her husband.
After a bitter fight Salva was worsted, and no wonder , as Bhishma was a
peerless bowma n, but at the request of the princesses Bhishma  spared his
life.Arriving in Hastinapura with the princesses. Bhishma made preparations for
their marriage to Vichitravirya. When all were assembled for the marriage,
Amba smiled mockingly at Bhishma and addressed him as follo ws: “O son
of Gang a, you are aware of what is enjoined in the scriptures. I have
mentally chosen Salva, the king of Saubala, as my husband. You have
brought me here by force. Knowing this, do what you, learned in the
scriptures, should do."
Bhishma admitted the force of her objection and sent her to Salva with
proper escort. The marriage of Ambika and Ambalika, the two younger
sisters, with V ichitravirya was duly solemnised.
Amba went rejoicing to Salva and told him what had happened: “I have
mentally chosen you as my husband from the very start. Bhishma has sent
me to you. Marry me according to the sastras."
Salva replied: “Bhishma defeate d me in sight of all, and carried you away . I
have been disgraced. So, I cann ot receive you now as my wife. Return to
him and do as he commands.” With these words Salva sent her back to
Bhishma.
She returned to Hastinapura and told Bhishma of what had taken place. The
grandsire tried to induce Vichitravirya to marry her, but Vichitravirya
roundly refused to marry a maiden whose heart had already been given to
another .
Amba then turned to Bhishma and besought him to marry her himself as
there was no other recourse.
It was impossibl e for Bhishma to break his vow, sorry as he was for Amba,
and after some vain attempts to make V ichitravirya change his mind, he told
her there was no way left to her but to go again to Salva and seek to
persuade him. This at first she was too proud to do, and for long years she
abode in Hastinapura. Finally , in sheer desperation, she went to Salva and
found him adamant in refusal.
The lotus-eyed Amba spent six bitter years in sorrow and baffled hope, and
her heart was seared with suffering and all the sweetness in her turned to
gall and fierce hatred towards Bhishma as the cause of her blighted life. She
sought in vain for a champion among the princes to fight and kill Bhishmaand thus avenge  her wrongs but even the foremost warriors were afraid of
Bhishma and paid no heed to her appeal. At last, she resor ted to hard
austerities to get the grace of Lord Subrahmanya. He gracious ly appeared
before her and gave her a garland of ever-fresh lotuses, saying that the
wearer of that garland would become the enemy of Bhishma.
Amba took the garland and again besought every Kshatriya to accept the
garland—gift of the six-faced Lord and to champion her cause.  But no one
had the hardihood to antagonise Bhishma. Finally , she went to King
Drupada who also refused to grant her prayer . She then hung the garland at
Drupada’ s palace gate and went away to the forest.
Some ascetics whom she met there and to whom she told her sorrowful tale
advised her to go to Parasurama as a suppliant. She followed their advice.
On hearing her sad story , Parasurarna was moved with compassion and
said: “Dear child, what do you want? I can ask Salva to marry  you if you
wish it.”
Amba said: “No, I do not wish it. I no longer desire marriage or home or
happiness. There  is now but one thing in life for me—revenge on Bhishma.
The only boon I seek is the death of Bhishma.”
Parasurama, moved as much by her anguish as by his abiding hatred of the
kshatriya race, espoused her cause and fought with Bhishma. It was a long
and equal comb at between the two greatest men-at-arms of the age, but in
the end Parasur ama had to acknowledge defeat. He told Amba: “I have
done all that I could and I have failed. Throw yourself on the mercy of
Bhishma. That is the only course left to you.”
Consumed with grief and rage, and kept alive only by the passion for
revenge, Amba went to the Himalayas and practised rigorous austerities to
get the grace of Siva, now that all human aid had failed her. Siva appeared
before her and granted her a boon that in her next birth she would slay
Bhishma.
Amba was impatient for that rebirth which would give her, her heart’ s
desire. She made a pyre and plunged into the fire- pouring out the flame in
her heart into the scarcely hotter blaze of the pyre.By the grace of Lord Siva, Amba was born as the daught er of King
Drupada. A few years after her birth, she saw the garland of never -fading
flowers that still hung at the palace gate and had remained there untouched
by anyo ne through fear. She put it round her neck. Her father Drupada was
in consternation  at her temerity which he feared would draw on his head the
wrath of Bhishma. He sent his daughter in exile out of the capital to the
forest. She practised austerities  in the forest and in time was transformed
into a male and became known as the warrior Sikhandin.
With Sikhandin  as his charioteer , Arjuna attacked Bhishma on the
battlefield of Kurukshetra. Bhishma knew that Sikhandin was born as
female, and true to his code of chivalry he would not fight him under any
circumstance. So it was that Arjuna could fight screened by Sikhandin and
conquer Bhishma, especially because Bhishma knew that his long and
weary probation  on earth was finished and consented to be vanquished. As
the arrow s struc k Bhishma in his last light. he singled out those which had
pierced him deepest and said: “This is Arjuna‘s arrow and not Sikhandin’ s."
So fell this great warrior .CHAPTER IV: DEVAYANI AND KACHA
IN ancie nt times, there was a bitter struggle between the devas or gods and
the asuras or demons for the lordship of the three worlds. Both belligerents
had illustrious preceptors-Brihaspati who was pre-emine nt in the
knowledge of the V edas was the guiding spirit of the devas, while the asuras
relied on Sukracharya’ s profoun d wisdom. The asuras had the formidable
advantage that Sukracharya alone possessed the secret of Sanjivini which
could recall the dead to life. Thus the asuras who had fallen in the battle
were brought back to life, time and again, and continued their fight with the
devas. The deva s were thus at a great disadvantage in their long, drawn-out
war with their natural foes.
They went to Kacha, the son of Brihaspati, and besought his aid. They
begged him to win his way into the good graces of Sukra charya and
persuade him to take him as a pupil. Once admitted to intimacy and
confidence, he was to acquire, by fair means or foul, the secret of Sanjivini
and remove the great handicap under which the devas suf fered.
Kacha acceded to their request and set out to meet Sukracharya who lived
in the capital city of Vrishaparv a, the king of the asuras. Kacha went to the
house of Sukra, and after due salutation, addressed him thus: “I am Kacha,
the grandson of the sage Angiras and the son of Brihaspati. I am a
brahmacharin seeking knowledge under your tutelage.” It was the law that
the wise teacher should not refuse a worthy pupil who sought knowledge of
him. So Sukra acceded and said: “Kacha, you belong to a good family . I
accept you as my pupil, the more willingly , that by doing so I shall also be
showing my respect for Brihaspati. ”
Kacha spent many years under Sukracharya, rendering to perfection the
prescribed duties in the household of his master . Sukracharya had a lovely
daughter , Devay ani, of whom he was extremely fond. Kacha devoted
himself to pleasing and serving  her with song and dance and pastime and
succeeded in winning her affection, without detriment however to the vows
of brahmacharya.When the asuras came to know of this, they became anxious as they
suspected that Kacha’ s object was somehow to wheedle out of Sukracharya
the secret of Sanjivini. They naturally sought to prevent such a calamity .
One day, as Kacha was engag ed in grazing the cattle of his master the
asuras seized him, tore him to pieces and cast his flesh to the dogs. When
the cattle returned without Kacha, Devayani was filled with anxiety and ran
to her father with loud lamentations: “The sun has set,” she walled, “and
your nightly fire sacrifice has been performed; still Kacha has not returned
home. The cattle have come back by themselves. I fear some mishap has
befallen Kacha. I cannot live without him."
The fond father employed the art of Sanjivini and invoked the dead youth to
appear . At once Kacha came back to life and greeted the master with smiles.
Asked by Devayani the reason for his delay , he told her that as he was
grazing the cattle the asuras came suddenly on him and slew him. How he
came back to~life he knew not, but come back to life he did, and there he
was.
On another occasion Kacha went to the forest to pluck flowers for
Devayani, and again the asuras seized and killed him, and pounding his
body to a paste, mixed it up in sea-water . As he did not return even after a
long time Devayani went as before to her father who brought Kacha back to
life by his Sanjivini, and heard from him all that had taken place.
For the third time again, the asuras killed Kacha and very cleverly as they
thought, burnt his body , mixed the ashes in wine and served it to
Sukracharya who drank it, suspecting nothing. Once more the cows
returned home without their keeper, and once again Devayani approached
her father with her distressful appeal for Kacha.
Sukracharya tried in vain to console his daughter .
“Though I have again and again brought back Kacha to life,” said he, “the
asuras seem bent upon killing him. Well, death is the common lot, and it is
not proper for a wise soul like you to sorrow at it. Your life is all before you
to enjoy , with youth and beauty and the goodwill of the world.”
Devayani deeply loved Kacha; and since the world began, wise saws have
never cured the ache of bereavement. She said: “Kacha, the grandson ofAngiras and the son of Brihaspati was a blameless boy, who was devoted
and tireless in our service. I loved him dearly , and now that he has been
killed, life to me has become bleak and insupportable. I shall therefore
follow in his path.” And Devayani began to fast.
Sukracharya, heart-stricken by his daughter's sorrow , became very angry
with the asuras, and felt that the heinous sin of killing a brahmana would
weigh heavily on their fortunes . He employed the Sanjivini art and called
upon Kacha to appear . By the power of the Sanjivini Kacha dispersed as he
was in the wine which was insid e Sukracharya’ s body at the time, regained
life, but prevent ed by the pecu liarity of his location from coming out, he
could only answer to his name from where he was. Sukracharya exclaimed
in angry  amazem ent: “O brahmacharin, how did you get into me’? Is this
also the work of the asuras? This is really too bad and makes me feel like
killing the asura s immediately and joining the devas. But tell me the whole
story .” Kacha narrated it all, in spite of the inconvenience imposed by his
position.
Vaisampayana continued: The high-souled and austere Sukracharya of
immeasurable greatness, became  angry at the deceit practised on him in his
wine, and proclaimed for the benefit of humanity:
‘Virtue will desert the man who through lack of wisdom drink s wine. He
will be an object of scorn to all. This is my message to humanity , which
should be regarded as an imperative scriptural injunction.’
Then he turned to his daughter Devayani and said:
“Dear daughter , here is a problem for you. For Kacha to live, he must rend
my stomach and come out of it, and that means death to me. His life can
only be bought by my death."
Devayani began to weep and said: “Alas! It is death to me either way-for if
either of you perish, I shall not survive."
As Sukracharya sought a way out of the difficulty , the real explanation of it
all flashed on him. He said to Kacha: “O son of Brihaspati, I now see with
what object you came... and verily you have secured it! I must bring you out
to life for the sake of Devayani, but equally for her sake I must not die
either . The only way is to initiate you in the art of Sanjivini so that you canbring me back to life after I shall have died when a way is torn out through
my entrails for you. Y ou should employ the knowledge I am going to impart
to you and reviv e me, so that Devayani need not grieve for either of us."
Accordingly Sukracharya imparted the art of Sanjivini to Kacha.
Immediately Kacha came forth from Sukracharya’ s body , emer ging like the
full moon from a cloud, while the great preceptor fell down mangled and
dead .
But Kacha at once brought Sukracharya back to life by means of his newly
acquired Sanjiv ini. Kacha bowed down to Sukracharya and said: “The
teacher who imparts wisdom to the ignorant is a father . Besides, as I have
issued from your body you are my mother too.”
Kacha remained  for many more years under the tutelage of Sukracharya.
When the period of his vow ended, he took leave of his master  to return to
the world of the gods. As he was about to depart Devayani humbly
addressed him thus: “O grandch ild of Angiras, you have won my heart by
your blameless life, your great attainments and nobility of birth. I have
loved you long and tenderly , even while you were faithfully following your
vows of a brahmacharin. You should now reciprocate my love and make me
happy by marry ing me. Brihaspati as well as yourself are fully worthy of
being honoured by me.”
In those days, it was no uncommon thing for wise and learned brahmana
ladies to speak out their mind with honourable frankness. But Kacha said:
“O Faultless One, you are my master ’s daughter and ever worthy of my
respect. I got back my life by being born out of your father ’s body . Hence I
am your brother . It is not proper for you, my sister , to ask me to wed you.”
Devayani sough t in vain to persuade him. “You are the son of Brihaspati,”
said she, “and not of my father . If I have been the cause of your coming
back to life, it was because I loved you- as indeed I have alway s loved you
and wanted you as my husband. It is not fit that you should give up one like
me sinless and devoted to you."
Kacha replied: “Do not seek to persuade me to unrighteousness. You are
enchanting - more so now than ever, flushed as you are with anger .  But I
am your brother . Pray bid me adieu. Serve unto perfection , ever and always,my master Sukracharya.”  With these words Kacha gently disengaged
himself and proceeded to the abode of Indra, the king of gods. Sukracharya
consoled his daughter .CHAPTER V: THE MARRIAGE OF DEVAYANI
ONE warm afternoon, pleasantly  tired with sporting in the woods Devayani
and the daughters of Vrishaparv a, king of the asuras went to bathe in the
cool waters of a sylvan pool depositing their garlands on the bank before
they entered its waters. A strong breeze blew their clothes together into a
huddled heap - and when they came to take them up again, some mistakes
naturally occurre d. It so happened that princess Sarmishtha, the daughter of
the king, clad herself in Devayani’ s clothes. The latter was vexed and
exclaimed half in jest at the impropriety of the daughter of a disciple
wearing the clothes of the master ’s daughter
These words were spoken half in jest but the princess Sarmishtha became
very angry and said arrogantly: “Do you not know that your father humbly
bows in reverence to my royal father every day? Are you not the daughter
of a beggar who lives on my father's bounty’? You forget I am of the royal
race which proudly gives- while you come of a race which begs and
receives - and you dare to speak thus to me." Sarmishtha went  on, getting
angrier and angrier as she spoke till, working herself up into a fit of anger .
She finally slapped Devayani on the cheek and pushed her into a dry well.
The asura maide ns thought that Devayani had lost her life and returned to
the palace.
Devayani had not been killed by the fall into the well but was in a sad plight
because she could not climb up the steep sides. Emperor Yayati of the
Bharata race who was hunting in the forest by a happy chance came to this
spot in search of water to slake his thirst. When he glanced into the well, he
saw something bright and looking closer , he was surprised to find a
beautiful maiden lying in the well.
He asked: "Who are you, O beau tiful maiden with bright earrings and ruddy
nails? Who is your father? What is your ancestry’? How did you fall into
the well?"
She replied: “I am the daughter of Sukracharya. He does not know that I
have fallen into the well. Lift me up” and she held forth her hands. Yayati
seized her hand and helped her out of the well.Devayani did not wish to return to the capital of the king of the asuras. She
did not feel it safe to go there, as she pondered again and again on
Sarmishtha’ s conduct. She told Yayati: “You have held a maiden by her
right hand, and you must marry her. I feel that you are in every way worthy
to be my husband."
Yayati replied: “Loving soul, I am a kshatriya and you are a brahmana
maiden. How can I marry you’? How can the daughter of Sukracharya, who
is worthy to be the preceptor of the whole world, submit to be the wife of a
kshatriya like myself? Revered lady, return home.” Having said these words
Yayati went back to his capital.
A kshat riya maiden could marry a brahmana according to the ancient
tradition, but it was considered wrong for a brahmana maiden to marry a
kshatriya. The important thing  was to keep the racial status of women
unlowered. Hence anuloma  or the practice of marrying men of higher castes
was legitimate and the reverse practice, known as pratiloma, i.e. marrying
men of a lower caste, was prohibited by the sastras.
Devayani had no mind to return home. She remained sunk in sorrow in the
shade of a tree in forest.
Sukracharya loved Devayani more than his life. After waiting long in vain
for the return of his daughter who had gone to play with her companions, he
sent a woman in search of her. The messenger after a weary search came on
her at last near the tree where she was sitting in dejection, her eyes red with
anger and grief. And she asked her what had happened.
Devayani said: “Friend, go at once and tell my father that I will not set my
foot in the capital of V rishaparva" and she sent her back to Sukracharya.
Extremely grieved at the sad plight of his daughter Sukracharya hurried to
her.
Caressing her, he said: "It is by their own actions, good or bad, that men are
happy or miserable. The virtues  or vices of others will not affect us in the
least." W ith these words of wisdom, he tried to console her .
She replied in sorrow and anger: “Father , leave alone my merits and faults,
which are after all my own concern.But tell me this— was Sarmishth a, the daughter of Vrishaparva, right when
she told me you were but a minstrel singing the praises of kings ? She called
me the daughte r of a mendican t living on the doles won by flattery . Not
content with this arrogant contumely , she slapped me and threw me into a
pit whic h was near. I cannot stay in any place within her father ’s territory .”
And Devayani began to weep.
Sukracharya drew himself up proudly: “Devayani,” he said with dignity ,
“you are not the daughter of a court minstrel. Your father does not live on
the wages of flattery . You are the daughter of one who is revere nced by all
the world. Indra, the king of the gods, knows this, and Vrisha parva is not
igno- rant of his debt to me. But no worthy man extols his own merits, and I
shall say no more about myself. Arise, you are a peerless gem among
women, bringing prosperity to your family . Be patient. Let us go home."
In this context Bhagavan Vyasa advises humanity in general in the
following words of counsel addressed by Sukracharya to his daughter :
“He conquers the world, who patiently puts up with the abuse of his
neighbours. He who controls his anger , as a horseman break s an unruly
horse, is indeed a charioteer and not he who merely holds the reins, but lets
the horse go whither it would. He who sheds his anger just as a snake its
slough, is a real hero. He who is not moved despite the greate st torments
inflicted by others, will realise his aim. He who never gets angry is superior
to the ritualist who faithfully performs for a hundred years the sacrifices
ordained by scripture. Servants, friends, brothers, wife, children, virtue and
truth abandon the man who gives way to anger . The wise will not take to
heart the words of boys and girls.”
Devayani humbly told her father: “I am indeed a little girl, but, I hope, not
too young to benefit by the great truth taught by you. Yet, it is not proper to
live with person s who have no sense of decency or decorum. The wise will
not keep  compa ny with those who speak ill of their family . However rich
they may be, the ill-mannered are really the veritable chandalas  outside the
pale of caste. The virtuous shou ld not mix with them. My mind is ablaze
with the anger roused by the taunts of Vrishaparva’ s daughter . The wounds
inflicted by weapons may close in time; scalds may heal gradually; but
wounds inflicted by words remain painful as long as one lives."Sukracharya went to V rishaparva and fixing his eyes on him gravely said:
“O king, though one’s sins may not bring immediate punishment they are
sure, sooner or later, to destroy the very germ of prosperity . Kacha, the son
of Briha spati, was a brahmacharin who had conquered his senses and never
committed any sin. He served me with fidelity and never strayed from the
path of virtue. Your attendants tried to kill him. I bore it. My daughter , who
holds her honour high, had to hear dishonouring words uttered by your
daughter . Besides, she was pushed into a well by your daughter . She cannot
any more stay in your kingdom.  Without her I cannot live here either . So, I
am going out of your kingdom."
At these  words the king of the asuras was sorely troubled and said: “I am
ignorant of the charges laid at my door. If you abandon me, I shall enter fire
and die.”
Sukracharya replied: “I care more for the happiness of my daughter than for
the fate of you and your asuras, for she is the one thing I have and dearer to
me than life itself. If you can appease her, it is well and good. Otherwise I
go."
Vrishaparva and his retinue went to the tree under which Devayani stood
and they threw themselves at her feet in supplication.
Devayani was stubborn and said: “Sarmishtha who told me that I was the
daughter of a beggar, should become my handmaiden and atten d on me in
the house into which my father gives me in marriage."
Vrishaparva consented and asked his attendants to fetch his daughter
Sarmishtha.
Sarmishtha admitted her fault and bowed in submission. She said: “Let it be
as my companio n Devayani desires. My father shall not lose his preceptor
for a fault committed by me. I will be her attendant.” Devayani was pacified
and returned to her house with her father .
On another occasion also Devayani came across Yayati. She repeated her
request that he should take her as his wife since he had clasp ed her right
hand, Yayati again repeated his objection that he, a kshatriya, could not
lawfully marry a brahmana. Finally they both went to Sukracharya and gothis assen t to their marriage. This is an instance of the pratilom a marriage
which was resorted to on exceptional occasions. The sastras, no doubt,
prescribe what is right and forbid what is wrong but a marriage once
effected cannot be made invalid.
Yayati and Devayani spent many days in happiness. Sarmishtha remained
with her as an attendant. One day Sarmishtha met Yayati in secret and
earnestly prayed to be taken also as his wife. He yielded to her prayer and
married her without the knowledge of Devayani.
But Devayani came to know of it and was naturally very angry . She
complained to her father and Sukracharya in his rage cursed Yayati with
premature old age.
Yayati, thus suddenly stricken with age in the very prime of his manhood,
begged so humbly for forgiveness that Sukracharya, who had not forgotten
Devayani’ s rescue from the well, at last relented.
He said: “O king, you have lost the glory which is youth. The curse cannot
be recall ed, but if you can persuade anyone to exchange his youth for your
age the exchange will take effect." Thus he blessed Yayati and bade him
farewell.CHAPTER VI; YAYATI
EMPEROR Yayati was one of the ancestors of the Pandavas. He had never
known defeat: He followed the dictates of the sastras, adored the gods and
venerated his ancestors with intense devotion. He became famous as a ruler
devoted to the welfare of his subjects.
But as has already been told, he became prematurely old by the curse of
Sukracharya for having wronged his wife Devayani. In the words of the
poet of the Mahabharata: “Yayati attained that old age which destroys
beauty and brings on miseries.” It is needless to describe the misery of
youth suddenly blighted into age, where the horrors of loss are accentuated
by pangs of recollection.
Yayati, who found himself suddenly an old man, was still haunted by the
desire for sensual enjoyment. He had five beautiful sons, all virtuous and
accomplished. Yayati called them and appealed piteously to their affection:
“The curse of your grandfather Sukracharya has made me unexpectedly and
prematurely old. I have not had my fill of the joys of life; for, not knowing
what was in store for me, I lived a life of restraint, denying myself even
lawful pleasures. One of you ought to bear the burden of my old age and
give his youth in return. He who agrees to this and bestows his youth on me
will be the ruler of my kingdom. I desire to enjoy life in the full vigour of
youth."
He first asked his eldest son. That son replied: “O great king, women and
servants will mock at me if I were to take upon myself your old age. I
cannot do so. Ask of my youn ger brothers who are dearer to you than
myself.”
When the secon d son was approached, he gently refused with the words:
“Father , you ask me to take up old age which destroys not only strength and
beauty but also - as I see - wisdom. I am not strong enough to do so.”
The third son replied: “An old man cannot ride a horse or an elephant. His
speech will falter . What can I do in such a helpless plight? I cannot agree.”
The king was angry and disappo inted that his three sons had declined to do
as he wished, but he hoped for better from his fourth son, to whom he said:“You should take up my old age. If you exchange your youth with me, I
shall give it back to you after some time and take back the old age with
which I have been cursed."
The fourth son begged to be forgiven as this was a thing he could by no
means consent to. An old man had to seek the help of others even to keep
his body clean, a most pitiful plight. No, much as he loved his father he
could not do it.
Yayati was struck with sorrow at the refusal of the four sons. Still, hoping
against hope, he supplicated his last son who had never yet opposed his
wishes: “You must save me. I am afflicted with this old age with its
wrinkles, debilit y and grey hairs as a result of the curse of Sukracharya. It is
too hard a trial! If you will take upon yourself these infirmities, I shall enjoy
life for just a while more and then give you back your youth and resume my
old age and all its sorrows. Pray, do not refuse as your elder brothers have
done.” Puru, the youngest son, moved by filial love, said: “Father , I gladly
give you my youth and relieve you of the sorrows of old age and cares of
State. Be happy .” Hearing these words Y ayati embraced him.
As soon as he touched his son, Yayati became a youth. Puru, who accepted
the old age of his father , ruled the kingdom and acquired great renown.
Yayati enjoyed life for long, and not satisfied, went later to the garden of
Kubera and spent many years with an apsara maiden. After long years spent
in vain efforts to quench desire by indulgence, the truth dawned on him.
Returning to Puru, he said:
“Dear son, sensual desire is never quenched by indulgence any more than
fire is by pouring ghee in it. I had heard and read this but till now I had not
realised it. No object of desire - corn, gold, cattle or women - nothing can
ever satisfy the desire of man. We can reach peace only by a mental poise
beyond likes and dislikes. Such is the state of Brahman. Take back your
youth and rule the kingdom wisely and well."
With these words Yayati took his old age. Puru, who regained his youth,
was made king by Yayati who retired to the forest. He spent his time there
in austerities and, in due course, attained heaven.CHAPTER VII: VIDURA
THE sage Mandavya who had acquired strength of mind and knowledge of
the scriptures spent his days in penance and the practice of truth. He lived in
a hermitage in the forests on the outskirts of the city. One day while he was
immersed in silent contemplation under the shade of a tree outside his hut
of leaves, a band of robbers fled through the woods with officers of the king
in hot pursuit. The fugitives entered the ashrama thinking that it would be a
convenient place  to hide themse lves in. They placed their booty  in a corner
and hid themselves. The soldiers of the king came to the ashrama tracking
their footsteps.
The commander  of the soldiers  asked Mandavya, who was rapt in deep
meditation, in a tone of peremptory command: “Did you see the robbers
pass by? Where did they go? Reply at once so that we may give chase and
capture them.” The sage, who was absorbed in yoga, remained silent. The
commander repeated the question insolently .
But the sage did not hear anything. In the meantime some of the attendants
entered the ashrama and discovered the stolen goods lying there. They
reported this to their commande r. All of them went in and found the stolen
goods and the robbers who were in hiding.
The commander thought: “Now I know the reason why the brahmana
pretended to be a silent sage. He is indeed the chief of these robbers. He has
inspired this robbery .” Then he ordered his soldiers to guard the place, went
to the king and told him that the sage Mandavya had been caug ht with the
stolen goods.
The king was very angry at the audacity of the chief of the robbers who had
put on the garb of a brahmana sage, the better to deceive the world. Without
pausing to verify the facts, he ordered the wicked criminal, as he thought
him, to be impaled.
The commander returned to the hermitage, impaled Mandavya on a spear
and handed over the stolen things to the king.
The virtuous sage, though impaled on the spear , did not die. Since he was in
yoga when he was impaled he remained alive by the power of yoga. Sageswho lived in other parts of the forest came to his hermitage and asked
Mandavya how he came to be in that terrible pass.
Mandavya replied: “Whom shall I blame? The servants of the king, who
protect the world, have inflicted this punishment."
The king was surprised and frightened when he heard that the impaled sage
was still alive and that he was surrounded by the other sages of the forest.
He hastened to the forest with his attendants and at once ordered the sage to
be taken  down from the spear . Then he prostrated at his feet and prayed
humbly to be for given for the of fence unwittingly committed.
Mandavya was not angry with the king, He went straight to Dharma, the
divine dispenser of justice, who was seated on his throne, and asked him:
“What crime have I committed to deserve this torture?”
Lord Dharma, who knew the great power of the sage, replied in all
humility: “O sage, you have tortured birds and bees. Are you not aware that
all deeds, good or bad, howev er small, inevitably produce their results,
good or evil?"
Mandavya was surprised at this reply of lord Dharmzt and asked: “When
did I commit this of fence? "
Lord Dharma replied: "When you were at child."
Mandavya then pronounced a curse on Dharma: “This punishment you have
decreed is far in excess of the deserts of a mistake committed by a child in
ignorance. Be born, therefore as a mortal in the world.”
Lord Dharma who was thus cursed by the sage Mandavya incarnated as
Vidura and was born of the servant-maid of Ambalika, the wife of
Vichitravirya.
This story is intended to show that Vidura was the incarnation of Dharma.
The great men of the world regarded Vidura as a mahatma who was
unparalleled in his knowledge of dharma, sastras and statesmanship and
was totally devoid of attachmen t and anger . Bhishma appointed him, while
he was still in his teens, as the chief counsellor of king Dhritarashtra.Vyasa has it that no one in the three worlds could equal Vidura in virtue and
knowledge. When Dhritarashtra gave his permission for the game of dice,
Vidura fell at his feet and protested solemnly: “O king and lord, I cannot
approve of this action. Strife will set in among your sons as a result. Pray,
do not allow this.”
Dhritarashtra also tried in many ways to dissuade his wicked son. He said to
him: “Do not proceed with this game. Vidura does not approv e of it - the
wise Vidura of lofty intellect who is ever intent on our welfare. He says the
game is bound to result in a fierceness of hate which will consume us and
our kingdom.” But Duryodhana did not heed this advice. Carried away by
his doting fondness for his son, Dhritarashtra surrendered  his better
judgment and sent to Y udhishthira the fateful invitation to the game.CHAPTER VIII: KUNTI DEVI
SURA, the grandfather of Sri Krishna, was a worthy scion of the Yadava
race. His daughter Pritha was noted for her beauty and virtues. Since his
cousin Kuntibho ja was childless, Sura gave his daughter Pritha in adoption
to him. From that time she was known by the name of Kunti after her
adoptive father .
When Kunti was a little girl, the sage Durvasa stayed for a time as a guest
in her father's house and she served the sage for a year with all care,
patience and devotion. He was so pleased with her that he gave her a divine
mantra. He said: “If you call upon any god repeating this mantra he will
manifest himself  to you and bless you with a son equal to him in glory .” He
granted her this boon because he foresaw by his yogic power the misfortune
which was in store for her future husband. *
The impatient curiosity of youth made Kunti test then and there the efficacy
of the mantra by repeating it and invoking the Sun whom she saw shining in
the heavens. At once the sky grew dark with clouds and under cover of
them the Sun god approached the beautiful princess Kunti and stood gazing
at her with ardent, soul-scorching admiration. Kunti, over-pow ered by the
glorious vision of her divine visitor , asked: “O god, who art thou?”
The Sun replied: “Dear maiden, I am the Sun. I have been drawn to you by
the spell of the son--giving mantra that you have uttered."
Kunti was aghast and said: “I am an unwedded girl dependent on my father .
I am not fit for motherhood and do not desire it. I merely wished to test the
power of the boon granted by the sage Durvasa. Go back and forgive this
childish folly of mine.” But the Sun god could not thus return because the
power of the mantra held him. She for her part was mortally afraid of being
blamed by the world. The Sun god however reassured her:
“No blame shall attach to you. After bearing my son, you will regain
virginity .’
Kunti conceived by the grace of the Sun, the giver of light and life to all the
world. Divine births take place immediately without the nine months’weary course of mortal gestation. She gave birth to Kama who was born
with divine armour and earrings and was bright and beautiful like the Sun,
In time, he became one of the world's greatest heroes. After the birth of the
child, Kunti once again became a virgin as a result of the boon granted by
the Sun.
She wondered what she should do with the child. To hide her fault she
placed the child in a sealed box and set it afloat in a river. A childless
charioteer happened to see the floating case, and taking it, was surprised
and delighted to see within it a gorgeously beautiful child. He handed it
over to his wife who lavished a mother's love on it. Thus Karna , the son of
the Sun god, came to be brought up as a charioteer's child.
When the time came for giving  Kunti in marriage, Kuntibhoja invited all
the neighbouring princes and held a swayamvara for her to choose her
husband. Many eager suitors flocked to the swayamvara as the princess was
widely famed for her great beauty and virtue. Kunti placed the garland on
the neck of King Pandu, the bright representative of the Bharata race,
whose personality eclipsed the lustre of all the other princes assembled
there. The marriage was duly solemnised and she accompanied her husband
to his capital Hastinapur .
On the advice of Bhishma and in accordance with the prevail ing custom,
Pandu took a second wife Madr i, the sister of the king of Madra. In the old
days the kings took two or three wives for making sure of progeny and not
for mere sensual desire.
* A sage cursed Pandu to the effect that he would have no childr en. This
will be narrated in the next chapter .CHAPTER IX: DEATH OF PANDU
ONE day King Pandu was out hunting. A sage and his wife were also
sporting in the forest in the guise of deer. Pandu shot the male with an
arrow all ignorant of the fact that it was a sage in disguise. Stric ken to death
the rishi thus cursed Pandu: “Sinner , you will meet with death the moment
you taste the pleasures of the bed.” Pandu was heartbroken at this curse and
retreated to the forest with his wives after entrusting his kingdom to
Bhishma and Vidura, and lived there a life of perfect abstinence. Seeing that
Pandu was desirous of offspring, which the rishi's curse had denied him,
Kunti confided to him the story of the mantra she had received from
Durvasa.
He urged Kunti and Madri to use the mantra and thus it was that the five
Pandavas were born of the gods to Kunti and Madri. They were born and
brought up in the forest among ascetics. King Pandu lived for many years in
the forest with his wives and children.
It was spring time. And one day Pandu and Madri forgot their sorrows in
the rapture of sympathy with the throbbing life around them , the happy
flowers, creeper s, birds and other creatures of the forest. In spite of Madri‘s
earnest and repeated protests Pandu‘s resolution broke down under the
exhilarating influence of the season, and at once the curse of the sage took
effect, and Pandu fell dead.
Madri could not contain her sorrow. Since she felt that she was responsible
for the death of the king. she burnt herself on the pyre of her husband
entreating Kunt i to remain and be a mother to her doubly orphaned
children.
The sages of the forest took the bereaved and grief-stricken Kunti and the
Pandavas to Hastinapura and entrusted them to Bhishma. Yudhishthira was
but sixteen years old at that time.
When the sages came to Hastinapura and reported the death of Pandu in the
forest, the whole kingdom was plunged in sorrow . Vidura, Bhishma, Vyasa,
Dhritarashtra and others performed the funeral rites. All the people in the
kingdom lamented as at a personal loss.Vyasa said to Satyavati, the grandmother: “The past has gone by pleasantly ,
but the future has many sorrows in store. The world has passe d its youth
like a happy dream and it is now entering on disillusionment, sin, sorrow
and suffering. Time is inexorable. You need not wait to see the miseries and
misfortunes which will befall this race. It will be good for you to leave the
city and spend the rest of your days in a hermitage in the forest." Satyavati
agreed and went  to the forest with Ambika and Ambalika. Thes e three aged
queens passed through holy asceticism to the higher regions of bliss and
spared themselves the sorrows of their children.CHAPTER X: BHIMA
THE five sons of Pandu and the hundred sons of Dhritarashtra grew up in
mirth and merriment at Hastina pura. Bhima excelled them all in physical
prowess. He used to bully Duryodhana and the other Kauravas by dragging
them by the hair and beating them. A great swimmer , he would dive into
pools, with one or more of them clasped helpless in his arms, and remain
under water till they were almost drowned. Whenever they climbed up on a
tree he would stand on the ground and kick at the tree and shake  them down
like ripe fruits. The bodies of the sons of Dhritarashtra would be ever sore
with bruises as a result of Bhim a’s practical jokes. Small wonder that the
sons of Dhritarashtra nursed a deep hatred for Bhima from  their very
infancy .
As the princes grew up Kripacharya taught them archery and the practice of
arms and other things that princes should learn. Duryodhana’ s jealousy
towards Bhima warped his mind and made him commit many improper
acts.
Duryodhana was very much worried. His father being blind, the kingdom
was ruled by Pandu, After his death Yudhishthira, the heir-apparent, would
in course of time become king. Duryodhana thought that as his blind father
was quite helpless he must, to prevent Yudhishthira’ s acces sion to the
throne, contrive a way of killing Bhima. He made arrangements to carry out
his resolve since he thought that the powers of the Pandavas would decline
with the death of Bhima.
Duryodhana and his brothers planned to throw Bhima into the Ganges,
imprison Arjuna and Yudhishthira and then seize the kingdom and rule it.
So Duryodhana went with his brothers and the Pandavas for a swim in the
Ganges. After the sports they slept in their tents being exhausted. Bhima
had exerted himself more than the others and as his food had been
poisoned, he felt drowsy and lay down on the bank of the river. Duryodhana
bound him with wild creepers  and threw him into the river. The evil
Duryodhana had already caused sharp spikes to be planted on the spot. This
was done purposely so that Bhima might in falling be impaled on the
spikes, and lose his life. Fortunately there was no spike in the place whereBhima fell. Poisonous water -snakes bit his body . The poisonous food he
had taken was counteracted by the snake poison and Bhima came to no
harm, and presently , the river washed him to a bank.
Duryodhana thought that Bhima must have died as he had been thrown in
the river infested with poisono us snakes and fanged with spikes. So he
returned to the city with the rest of the party in great joy .
When Yudhishthira enquired about the whereabouts of Bhima, Duryodhana
informed him that he had prece ded them to the city. Yudhishth ira believed
Duryodhana and as soon as he returned home, asked his mother whether
Bhima had returned home. His anxious question brought forth the reply that
Bhima had not yet returned, which made Yudhishthira suspec t some foul
play against his brother , and he went again with his brothers to the forest
and searched everywhere. But Bhima could not be found. They went back
in great sorrow .
Some time later Bhima awoke and trudged wearily back home . Kunti and
Yudhishthira welcomed him and embraced him in great joy. By the poison
that had entered his system Bhima became stronger than before.
Kunti sent for V idura and told him in secret:
"Duryodhana is wicked and cruel. He seeks to kill Bhima since he wants to
rule the kingdom. I am worried."
Vidura replied: “What you say is true, but keep your thoughts to yourself,
for if the wicked Duryodhana is accused or blamed, his anger and hatred
will only increase. Your sons are blessed with long life, you need have no
fear on that account.”
Yudhislithira also warned Bhima and said: “Be silent over the matter .
Hereafter , we have to be careful and help one another and protect
ourselves.”
Duryodhana was surprised to see Bhima come back alive. His jealousy and
hatred increased. He heaved a deep sigh and pined away in sorrow .CHAPTER XI: KARNA
THE Pandavas and the Kauravas learnt the practice of arms first from
Kripacharya and later from Drona. A day was fixed for a test and exhibition
of their proficie ncy in the use of arms in the presence of the Royal family
and as the public had also been invited to witness the performa nce of their
beloved princes,  there was a large and enthusiastic crowd. Arjun a displayed
superhuman skill with his weapons and the vast assemblage was lost in
wonder and admiration. Duryodhana’ s brow was dark with envy and hate.
At the close of the day, there came suddenly from the entrance of the arena
a sound, loud and compelling like thunder - the sound made by the slapping
of migh ty arms  in challenge. All eyes turned in that direction . They saw
enter through the crowd, which made way in awed silence, a godlike youth
from whom light and power seemed to emanate. He looked proudly round
him, cast a negligent salute to Drona and Kripa, and strode up to Arjuna.
The brothers, all unaware, by the bitter irony of fate, of their common
blood, faced one another; for it was Kama.
Karna addressed Arjuna in a voice deep as rumbling thunder : “Arjuna, I
shall show greater skill than you have displayed.”
With Drona’ s leave, Karna - the lover of battle - then and there duplicated
all Arjun a's feats with careless ease. Great was Duryodhana's exultation. He
threw his arms round Karna:
“Welcome, O thou with mighty  arms, whom good fortune has sent to us. I
and this kingdom of the Kurus are at your command. "
Said Karna:
“I, Karn a, am grateful, O king. Only two things I seek ——yo ur love and
single combat with Partha."
Duryodhana clasped Karna again to his bosom:
“My prosperity is all thine to enjoy ."
As love flooded Duryodhana’ s heart, even so did blazing wrath  fill Arjuna
who felt affront ed; and glaring fiercely at Karna who stood, stately as amountain peak, receiving the greetings of the Kaurava brothers, he said:
“O Karna, slain by me thou shalt presently go to the hell appointed for those
who intrude uninvited and prate unbidden."
Karna laughed in scorn:
“This arena is open to all, O Arjuna, and not to you alone. Might is the
sanction of sovereignty and the law is based on it. But what is the use of
mere talk: which is the weapon of the weak? Shoot arrows instead of
words."
Thus challenged, Arjuna, with Drona’ s permission, hastily embraced his
brothers and stood ready for combat, while Karna taking leave of the Kuru
brothers confronted him weapon in hand.
And, as though the divine parents of the heroes sought to enco urage their
offspring and witness this fateful battle, Indra, the lord of the thunderclouds,
and Bhaskara of the infinite rays, simultaneously appeared in the heavens.
When she saw Karna, Kunti knew him as her first born and fainted away .
Vidura instructe d the maid-servant to attend upon her and she revived. She
stood stupefied with anguish not knowing what to do.
As they were about to join in battle, Kripa, well-versed in the rules of single
combat, stepped between them and addressed Karna:
“This prince, who is ready to light with thee, is the son of Pritha and Pandu
and a scion of the Kuru race. Revea, O mighty armed, thy paren tage and the
race rendered illustrious by thy birth. It is only after knowing thy lineage
that Partha can fight with thee, for high-born princes cannot engage in
single combat with unknown adventurers.”
When he heard these words, Karna bent down his head like a lotus under
the weight of rain water .
Duryodhana stood up and said: “If the combat cannot take place merely
because Karna is not a prince-why , that is easily remedied. I crown Karna
as the king of Anga.” He then obtained the assent of Bhishma and
Dhritarashtra, performed all the necessary rites and invested Karna with the
sovereignty of the kingdom of Anga giving him the crown, jewels and otherroyal insignia. At that moment, as the combat between the youthful heroes
seemed about to commence, the old charioteer Adhiratha, who was the
foster -father of Karna, entered the assembly , staff in hand and quaking with
fear.
No sooner did he see him than Karna, the newly crowned king of Anga,
bowed his head and did humble obeisance in all filial reverence. The old
man called him son, embraced him with his thin and trembling arms, and
wept with joy wetting with tears  of love his head already moistened by the
water of the coronation.
At this sight, Bhima roared with laughter and said: “O, he is after all only
the son of a charioteer! Take up the driving whip then as befits thy
parentage. Thou  art not worth y of death at the hands of Arjuna. Nor
shouldst thou reign in Anga as a king.”
At this outrageous speech, Karna’s lips trembled with anguish and he
speechlessly looked up at the setting sun with a deep sigh. But Duryodhana
broke in indignantly:
“It is unworthy of you, O Vrikodara, to speak thus. Valour is the hall-mark
of a Kshatriya - nor is there much sense in tracing great heroes and mighty
rivers to their sources. I could give you hundreds of instances of great men
of humble birth —and I know awkward questions might be asked of your
own origin. Look at this warrio r, his godlike form and bearing,  his armour
and earrings, and his skill with weapons. Surely there is some mystery
about him for how could a tiger be born of an antelope? Unworthy of being
king of Anga, didst thou say? I verily hold him worthy to rule the whole
world.”
In generous wrath, Duryodhana took Karna in his chariot and drove away .
The sun set; the crowd dispersed in tumult. There were groups loud in talk
under the light of the lamps, some glorifying Arjuna, others Karna, and
others again Duryodhana according to their predilection.
Indra foresaw that a supreme contest was inevitable between his son Arjuna
and Karna; and he put on the garb of a brahmana and came to Karna, who
was reputed for his charity , and begged of him his earrings and armour . The
Sun god had already warned Karna in a dream that Indra would try todeceive him in this manner . Still, Karna could not bring himself to refuse
any gift that was asked of him. Hence he cut off the earrings and armour
with which he was born and gave them to the brahmana.
Indra, the king of gods, was filled with surprise and joy. After accepting the
gift, he praised Karna as havin g done what no one else would do, and,
shamed into generosity , bade Karna ask for any boon he wanted.
Karna replied: “I desire to get your weapon, the Sakti, which has the power
to kill enemies.” Indra granted the boon, but with a fateful proviso. He said:
“You can use this weapon against but one enemy , and it will kill him
whosoever he may be. But this killing done, this weapon will no longer be
available to you but will return to me.” W ith these words Indra disappeared.
Karna went to Parasurama and became his disciple by representing to him
that he was a brahmana. He learnt of Parasurama the mantra for using the
master weapon known as Brahmastra. One day Parasurama was reclining
with the head on Karna’ s lap when a stinging worm burrowed into Karna's
thigh. Blood began to flow and the pain was terrible, but Karna bore it
without tremor lest he should disturb the master ’s sleep. Parasurama awoke
and saw the blood which had poured from the wound. He said: “Dear pupil,
you are not a brahmana. A kshatriya alone can remain unmoved under all
bodily torments. T ell me the truth.”
Karna confessed that he had told a lie in presenting himself as a brahmana
and that he was in fact the son of a charioteer . Parasurama in his anger
pronounced this curse on him: “Since you deceived your guru, the
Brahmastra you have learnt shall fail you at the fated moment. You will be
unable to recall the invocatory mantra when your hour comes.”
It was because of this curse that at the crisis of his last fight with Arjuna,
Karna was not able to recal l the Brahmastra spell, though he had
remembered it till then. Karna was the faithful friend of Duryodhana and
remained loyally with the Kauravas until the end. After the fall of Bhishma
and Drona, Karna became the leader of the Kaurava army and fought
brilliantly for two days. In the end, the wheel of his chariot stuck in the
ground and he was not able to lift it free and drive the chariot along. Whilehe was in this predicament, Arjuna killed him. Kunti was sunk in sorrow , all
the more poignant because she had, at that time, to conceal it.CHAPTER XII: DRONA
DRONA, the son of a brahman a named Bharadwaja, after completing his
study of the Vedas and the Vedangas, devoted himself to the art of archery
and became a great master . Drupada, the son of the king of Panchala, who
was a friend of Bharadwaja, was a fellow-student of Drona in the hermitage
and there grew up between them the generous intimacy of youth. Drupada,
in his boyish enthusiasm used often to tell Drona that he would give him
half his kingdom when he ascended the throne.
After completing his studies, Drona married the sister of Kripa , and a son
Aswatthama was born to them. Drona was passionately attached to his wife
and son, and, for their sake desired to acquire wealth, a thing which he had
never cared for before. Learning that Parasurama was distributing his riches
among the brahmanas, he first went to him; but he was too late as
Parasurama had already given away all his wealth and was about to retire to
the fores t. But, anxious to do something for Drona, Parasuram a offered to
teach him the use of weapons, of which he was supreme master .
Drona joyfully agreed, and great archer as he already was, he became
unrivalled maste r of the military art, worthy of eager welcome as preceptor
in any princely house in that war like age.
Meanwhile, Drupada had ascended the throne of Panchala on the death of
his fathe r. Remembering their early intimacy and Drupada’ s expressions of
readiness to serve him - even to the extent of sharing his kingdom - Drona
went to him in the confident hope of being treated generously . But he found
the king very different from the student. When he introduced himself as an
old friend, Drupada, far from being glad to see him, felt it an intolerable
presumption. Drunk with powe r and wealth, Drupada said: “O brahmana,
how dare you address me familiarly as your friend? What friendship can
there be between a throned king and a wandering beggar? What a fool must
you be to presume on some long past acquaintance to claim friendship with
a king who rules a kingdom? How can a pauper be the friend of a wealthy
man, or an ignorant boor of a learned scholar , or a coward of a hero?
Friendship can exist only betwe en equals. A vagrant beggar cannot be thefriend of a sovereign.” Drona was turned out of the palace with scorn in his
ears and a blazing wrath in his heart.
He made a mental vow to punish the arrogant king for this insult and his
repudiation of the sacred claims of early friendship. His next move in
search of emplo yment was to go to Hastinapura, where he spent a few days,
in retirement, in the house of his brother -in-law Kripacharya.
One day, the princes were playing with a ball outside the precincts of the
city, and in the course of the game, the ball as well as Yudhishthira’ s ring
fell into a well. The princes all gathered round the well and saw the ring
shining from the bottom through the clear water , but could see no way of
getting it out. They did not, however , notice that a brahmana of dark
complexion stood nearby watching them with a smile.
“Princes,” he surprised them by saying, “you are the descendants of the
heroic Bharata race. Why cannot you take out the ball as anyone skilled in
arms should know how to do? Shall I do it for you?”
Yudhishthira laughed and said in fun: “O brahmana, if you take out the ball,
we will see that you have a good meal in the house of Kripach arya.” Then
Drona, the brahmana stranger , took a blade of grass and sent it forth into the
well after recitin g certain words of power for propelling it as an arrow . The
blade of grass straightway sped and stuck into the ball. Afterwards he sent a
number of similar blades in succession which clinging together formed a
chain, wherewith Drona took out the ball.
The princes were lost in amazement and delight and begged of him to get
the ring also. Drona borrowed a bow, fixed an arrow on the string and sent
it right into the ring. The arrow rebounding brought up the ring and the
brahmana handed it to the prince with a smile.
Seeing these feats, the princes were astonished and said: “We salute you, O
brahmana. Who  are you? Is there anything we can do for you?” and they
bowed to him.
He said: “O princes, go to Bhishma and learn from him who I am."
From the description given by the princes, Bhishma knew that the
brahmana was none other than the famous master Drona. He decided thatDrona was the fittest person to impart further instruction to the Pandavas
and the Kauravas. So, Bhishm a received him with special honour and
employed him to instruct the princes in the use of arms.
As soon  as the Kauravas and the Pandavas had acquired mastery in the
science of arms, Drona sent Karna and Duryodhana to seize Drupada and
bring him alive, in dischar ge of the duty they owed to him as their master .
They went as ordered by him, but could not accomplish their task. Then the
master sent forth Arjuna on the same errand. He defeated Drupada in battle
and brought him and his minister captives to Drona.
Then Drona smilingly addressed  Drupada: “Great king, do not fear for your
life. In our boyhood we were companions but you were pleased to forget it
and dishonour me. You told me that a king alone could be friend to a king.
Now I am a king, having conquered your kingdom. Still I seek to regain my
friendship with you, and so I give you half of your kingdom which has
become mine by conquest. Your creed is that friendship is possible only
between equals, and we shall now be equals - each owning a half of your
kingdom.”
Drona thought this sufficient revenge for the insult he had suffered, set
Drupada at liberty and treated him with honour .
Drupada's pride was thus humb led but, since hate is never extinguished by
retaliation, and few things are harder to bear than the pangs of wounded
vanity , hatred of Drona and a wish to be revenged on him became the ruling
passion of Drupada’ s life. The king performed tapas, underwe nt fasts and
conducted sacrif ices in order to win the gratified gods to bless him with a
son who should  slay Drona and a daughter who should wed Arjuna. His
efforts were crowned with success with the birth of Dhrishtadyumna who
commanded the Pandava army  at Kurukshetra and, helped by a strange
combination of circumstances, slew the otherwise unconquerable Drona,
and birth of Draupadi, the consort of the Pandavas.CHAPTER XIII
THE WAX PALACE
THE jealousy of Duryodhana began to grow at the sight of the physical
strength of Bhima and the dexterity of Arjuna. Karma and Sakuni became
Duryodhana’ s evil counsellors in planning wily stratagems. As for poor
Dhritarashtra, he was a wise man no doubt and he also loved his brother ’s
sons, but he was weak of will and dotingly attached to his own children. For
his child ren’s sake the worse became the better reason, and he would
sometimes even knowingly follow the wrong path.
Duryodhana sought in various ways to kill the Pandavas. It was by means
of the secret help rendered by Vidura who wanted to save the family from a
great sin that the Pandavas escaped with their lives.
One unfor givable offence of the Pandavas in the eyes of Duryodhana was
that the people of the city used to praise them openly and decla re in season
and out of seaso n that Yudhishthira alone was fit to be the king. They would
flock together and argue: “Dhritarashtra could never be king for he was
born blind. It is not proper that he should now hold the kingdom in his
hands. Bhishma cannot be king either , because he is devoted to truth and to
his vow that he would not be a king. Hence Yudhishthira alone should be
crowned as king. He alone can rule the Kuru race and the kingdom with
justice.” Thus people talked everywhere. These words were poison to
Duryodhana’ s ears, and made him writhe and burn with jealousy .
He went  to Dhritarashtra and complained bitterly of the public talk: “Father ,
the citizens babble irrelevant nonsense. They have no respect even for such
venerable perso ns as Bhishma and yourself. They say that Yudhishthira
should be immediately crowned king. This would bring disaster on us. You
were set aside because of your blindness, and your brother became the king.
If Yudhishthira is to succeed his father , where do we come? What chance
has our progeny? After Yudhishthira his son, and his son’s son, and then his
son will be the kings. We will sink into poor relations dependent on them
even for our food. T o live in hell would be better than that!”At these words, Dhritarashtra began to ponder and said: “Son, what you say
is true. Still Yudhishthira will not stray from the path of virtue. He loves all.
He has truly inherited all the excellent virtues of his deceased father . People
praise him and will support him, and all the ministers of the State and
commanders of armies, to whom Pandu had endeared himself by his
nobility of character , will surely espouse his cause. As for the people, they
idolise the Panda vas. We cannot oppose them with any chance of success. If
we do injustice, the citizens will rise in insurrection and eithe r kill us or
expel us. W e shall only cover ourselves with ignominy .”
Duryodhana replied: “Y our fears are baseless. Bhishma will at worst be
neutral, while Aswatthama is devoted to me, which means that his father
Drona and uncle Kripa will also be on our side. V idura cannot openly
oppose us, if for no other reason, because he has not the strength. Send the
Pandavas immediately to V aranavata. I tell you the solemn truth that my
cup of suf fering is full and I can bear no more, it pierces my heart and
renders me sleepless and makes my life a torment. After sending the
Pandayas to V aranavata we shall try to strengthen our party ."
Later , some politicians were prevailed upon to join Duryodhana’ s party and
advise the king in the matter . Kanika, the minister of Sakun i, was their
leader . “O king, ” he said, “guar d yourselves against the sons of Pandu, for
their goodness and influence are a menace to you and yours. The Pandavas
are the sons of your brother , but the nearer the kin, the closer and deadlier
the danger . They are very strong."
Sakuni’ s ministe r continued: “Be not wroth with me if I say a king should
be migh ty in action as in name, for nobody will believe in streng th which is
never displayed . State affairs should be kept secret and the earliest
indication to the public, of a wise plan, should be its execution. Also, evils
must be eradicated promptly for a thorn which has been allowed to remain
in the body may cause a festering wound. Powerful enemies should be
destroyed and even a weak foe should not be neglected since a mere spark,
if overlooked, may cause a forest fire. A strong enemy should be destroyed
by main s of stratagem and it would be folly to show mercy to him. O king,
guard yourself against the sons of Pandu. They are very powerful."Duryodhana told Dhritarashtra of his success in securing adherents: “I have
bought the goodwill of the king's attendants with gifts of wealth and
honour . I have won over his ministers to our cause. If you will adroitly
prevail upon the Pandavas to go to Varanavata, the city and the whole
kingdom will take our side. They will not have a friend left here. Once the
kingdom has become ours, there will be no power for harm left in them, and
it may even be possible to let them come back."
When many began to say what he himself wished to believe, Dhritarashtra’ s
mind was shaken and he yielded to his sons’ counsels. It only remained to
give effect to the plot. The ministers began to praise the beauty of
Varanavata in the hearing of the Pandavas and made mention of the fact that
a great festival in honour of Siva would be conducted there with all pomp
and splendour . The unsuspe cting Pandavas were easily persuaded,
especially when  Dhritarashtra also told them in tones of great affection that
they should certainly go and witness the festivities, not only because they
were worth seeing but becaus e the people of the place were eager to
welcome them. The Pandavas took leave of Bhishma and other elders and
went to V aranavata.
Duryodhana was elated. He plotted with Karna and Sakuni to kill Kunti and
her sons at Varanavata. They sent for Purochana, minister , and gave him
secret instructions which he bound himself to carry out faithfully .
Before the Pandavas proceeded to Varanavata, Purochana, true to his
instructions, hastened to the spot well in advance and had a beau tiful palace
built for their reception. Combustible materials like jute, lac, ghee, oil, and
fat were used in the construction of the palace. The materials for the
plastering of the walls were also inflammable. He skilfully filled up various
parts of the building with dry things which could catch fire easily , and had
inviting seats and bedsteads disposed at the most combustible places. Every
convenience was furnished for the Pandavas to dwell in the city without
fear, until the palace was built. When the Pandavas had settled down in the
wax house, the idea was to set fire to it at night when they were sound
asleep. The ostentatious love and solicitude with which the Pandavas had
been received and treated would obviate all suspicion and the fire would betaken as a sad case of pure accident. No one would dream of blaming the
Kauravas.CHAPTER XIV: THE ESCAPE OF THE
PANDAVAS
AFTER taking reverential leave of the elders and embracing their
comrades, the Pandavas proceeded to Varanavata. The citizens
accompanied them a part of their way and returned unwillingly  to the city.
Vidura pointedl y warned Yudhishthira in words intelligible only to the
prince:
“He alone will escape from danger who forestalls the intentions  of an astute
enemy . There are weapons sharper than those made of steel, and the wise
man who would  escape destruction must know the means to guard against
them. The conflagration that devastates a forest cannot hurt a rat which
shelters itself in a hole or a porcupine which burrows in the earth. The wise
man knows his bearings by looking at the stars."
This was meant to indicate to Yudhishthira and to him alone, Duryodhana's
hideous plot and the means of escape from danger . Yudhishthi ra answered
that he had grasped Vidura’ s meaning, and later he commun icated it to
Kuntidevi. Thou gh they had started on their journey in a sunshine of joy,
they now proceeded in a dark cloud of sorrow and anxiety .
The people of Varanavata were very happy to learn of the coming of the
Pandavas to their city and welcomed them. After a brief stay in other
houses while the palace specially meant for them was being got ready , they
moved into it under Purochana’ s guidance. It was named “Sivam” which
means prosperity , and that was the name which, in ghastly irony , was given
to the deathtrap. Yudhishthira diligently examined the whole place bearing
in mind Vidura’ s warning and verified that the building was without a
shadow of doubt constructed with combustible material. Yudhishthira told
Bhima: “Though  we know very well that the palace is a trap of death, we
should not make Purochana suspect that we know his plot. We should get
away at the right moment but escape would be difficult if we gave room for
any suspicion.”
So they stayed in that house to all appearance free from care. Meanwhile,
Vidura had sent an expert miner who met them in secret and said: “Mypassword is the veiled warning Vidura gave you. I have been sent to help
you for your protection.”
Thenceforward the miner worked for many days in secret, unknown to
Purochana, and completed a subterranean egress from the wax house right
under and across the walls and the moat which ran round the precincts.
Purochana had his quarters at the gateway of the palace. The Pandavas kept
armed vigil during night, but by day they used to go out hunting in the
forest, to all appearance bent on pleasure but really to make  themselves
familiar with the forest paths. As has already been said, they carefully kept
to themselves their knowledge of the wicked plot against their lives. On his
side Purochana,  anxious to lull all suspicion and make the murderous fire
seem an accident, waited fully a year before putting the plot into ef fect.
At last Purochana felt he had waited long enough; and the watchful
Yudhishthira, knowing that the fated moment had arrived, called his
brothers together and told them that then or never was the time for them to
escape.
Kuntidevi arranged a sumptuou s feast for the attendants that day. Her idea
was to lull them to well-fed sleep at night.
At midnight, Bhima set fire to the palace in several places. Kuntidevi and
the Pandava brothers hurried out through the subterranean passage, groping
their way out in the darkness. Presently , there was a roaring fire all over the
palace and a fast swelling crowd of frightened citizens all around in loud
and helpless lamentation. Some hustled aimlessly in futile efforts to put out
the conflagratio n and all joine d in the cry: “Alas! Alas! This surely is
Duryodhana’ s work - and he is killing the sinless Pandavas!” The palace
was reduced to ashes. Purochana‘s residence was enveloped in flames
before he could escape and he fell an unpitied victim to his own wicked
plot. The people of Varanavata sent the following message to Hastinapura:
“The palace which was the abode of the Pandavas has burnt down and no
one in it escaped alive.”
Vyasa has beautifully described the then mental state of Dhritarashtra: “Just
as the water of a deep pool is cool at the bottom and warm on the surface,so the heart of Dhritarashtra was at once warm with joy and chill with
sorrow .”
Dhritarashtra and his sons cast off their royal garments in token of
mourning for the Pandavas whom they believed consumed in the fire: they
dressed themselves in single garments as became sorrowful kinsmen and
went to the river and performed the propitiatory funeral rites. No outward
show of heart- broken bereavement was omitted.
It was noticed by some that Vidura was not so overcome by sorrow as the
others and this was set down to his philosophical bent of mind, but the real
reason was that he knew that the Pandavas had escaped to safety . When he
looked sad, he was in fact following with his mind’ s eye the weary
wanderings of the Pandavas. Seeing that Bhishma was sunk in sorrow ,
Vidura secretly comforted him by revealing to him the story of their
successful escape.
Bhima saw that his mother and brothers were exhausted by their nightly
vigils as well as by fear and anxiety . He therefore carried his mother on his
shoulders and took Nakula and Sahadeva on his hips, supporting
Yudhishthira and Arjuna with his two hands. Thus heavily laden, he strode
effortlessly like a lordly elephant forcing his way through the forest and
pushing aside the shrubs and trees that obstructed his path. When they
reached the Ganges, there was a boat ready for them in charge of a boatman
who knew their secret. They crossed the river in the darkness, and entering
a mighty forest they went on all night in darkness that wrapped them like a
shroud and in a silence broken hideously by the frightful noises of wild
animals. At last, quite fordone by toil, they sat down unable to bear the
pangs of thirst and overcome by the drowsiness of sheer fatigue. Kuntidevi
said: “I do not care even if the sons of Dhritarashtra are here to seize me,
but I must stretch my legs.” She forthwith laid herself down and was sunk
in sleep. Bhima forced his way about the tangled forest in search of water in
the darkness, and finding a pool,  he wetted his upper garment, made cups of
lotus leaves and brought wate r to his mother and brothers who were
perishing with thirst. Then, while the others slept in merciful forgetfulness
of their woes, Bhima alone sat awake absorbed in deep thought. “Do not the
plants and the creepers of the forest mutually help each other and live inpeace?" he reflected; “why should the wicked Dhritarashtra and
Duryodhana try to injure us in these ways?” Sinless himself, Bhima could
not understand the springs of sinfulness in others and was lost in grief.
The Pandavas marched on, suf fering many hardships and overcoming many
dangers. Part of the way , they would carry their mother to make better
speed; sometimes, tired beyond even heroic endurance, they would pause
and rest. Sometimes, full of life and the glorious strength of youth, they
would race with each other .
They met Bhagavan Vyasa on the way. All of them bowed before him and
received encouragement and wise counsel from him. When Kunti told him
of the sorrows that had befallen them, Vyasa consoled her with these words:
“No virtuous man is strong enough to live in virtue at all times, nor is any
sinner bad enough to exist in one welter of sin. Life is a tangled web and
there is no one in the world who has not done both good and evil. Each and
everyone has to bear the consequence of his actions. Do not give way to
sorrow .” Then they put on the garb of brahmanas, as advised by Vyasa,
went to the city of Ekachakra and stayed there in a brahmana's house,
waiting for better days.CHAPTER XV: THE SLAYING OF BAKASURA
IN the city of Ekachakra, the Pandavas stayed in the guise of brahmanas,
begging their food in the brahmana streets and bringing what they got to
their mother, who would wait anxiously till their return. If they did not
come back in time, she would be worried, fearing that some evil might have
befallen them.
Kunti would divide the food they brought in two equal portion s. One half
would go to Bhima; the other half would be shared by the other brothers
and the mother . Bhima, being born of the Wind god had great strength and a
mighty appetite. V rikodara, one of the names of Bhima, means wolf-bellied,
and a wolf, you know , looks always famished and, however much it might
eat, its hunger is never quite satisfied. Bhima’ s insatiable hunger and the
scanty food he used to get at Ekachakra went ill together , and he daily grew
thin, which caused much distre ss to his mother and brothers. Some time
later, Bhima became acquainted  with a potter for whom he dug and fetched
clay. The potter , in return, presented him with a big earthen pot which
became an object of merriment to the street urchins.
One day, when the other brothers had gone to beg for alms,  Bhimasena
stayed behind with his mother , and they heard loud lamentatio ns from the
house of their brahmana landlord. Some great calamity surely had befallen
the poor family and Kunti went inside to learn what it was. The brahmana
and his wife could hardly speak for weeping, but, at last the brahmana said
to his wife: “O unfortunate and foolish woman, though time and again I
wished we should leave this city for good, you would not agree. You
persisted in saying that you were born and bred here and here you would
stay where your parents and relations had lived and died. How can I think
of losing you who have been to me at once my life’s mate, loving mother ,
the wife who bore my children , nay, my all in all? I cannot send you to
death while I keep myself alive. This little girl has been given to us by God
as a trust to be handed over in time to a worthy man. It is unrighteous to
sacrifice her who is a gift of God to perpetuate the race. It is equally
impossible to allow this other , our son, to be killed. How can we live after
consigning to death our only solace in life and our hope for the hereafter? Ifhe is lost, who would pour libations for us and our ancestors? Alas! You did
not pay heed to my words, and this is the deadly fruit of your perversity . If I
give up my life, this girl and boy will surely die soon for want of a
protector . What shall I do? It is best that all of us perish togeth er" and the
brahmana burst forth sobbing.
The wife replied: “I have been a good wife to you, and done my duty by
bearing you a daughter and a son. You are able, and I am not, to bring up
and protect your children. Just as castout offal is pounced upon  and seized
by rapacious birds, a poor widowed woman is an easy prey to wicked and
dishonest people. Dogs fight for a cloth wet with ghee, and in pulling it
hither and thither in unclean greed, tear it to foul rags. In like manner , a
woman without a guardian beco mes the sport of wicked people who drag
her hither and thither . It is impossible for me to protect two fatherless
orphans - and they will perish miserably like fish in a waterless pond. It
would be best if I am handed over to the rakshasa. Blessed indeed is the
woman who passes to the other  world, while her husband is alive. This, as
you know , is what the scriptures say. Bid me farewell. Take care of my
children, I have been happy with you. I have performed many meritorious
actions. By my faithful devotion to you. I am sure of heaven, Death has no
terror for one who has been  a good wife. After I am gone, take another
wife. Gladden me with a brave smile, give me your blessing, and send me
to the rakshasa."
Hearing these words of his wife, the brahmana tenderly embrac ed her and,
utterly overcome by her love and courage, he wept like a child. When he
could find his voice, he replied: “O beloved and noble one, what words are
these? Can I bear to live without you? The first duty of a married man is to
protect his wife. I should indeed be a pitiful sinner if I lived after giving you
up to the rakshasa, sacrificing both love and duty .”
The daughter who was hearing this piteous conversation now interposed
with sobs: “Listen to me, child though I be and then do what is proper . It is
me alone that you can spare to the rakshasa. By sacrificing one soul, that is,
myself, you can save the others. Let me he the little boat to take you across
this river of calamity . If both of you pass away , both I and this little baby
brother of mine will soon perish unprotected in this hard world. If thisfamily of ours can be saved from destruction by my single death, what a
good death mine would be! Even if you consider my welfare alone, you
should send me to the rakshasa.”
At these brave words of the poor child, the parents tenderly embraced her
and wept. Seeing them all in tears the boy, hardly more than a haby , started
up with glowing eyes, lisping: “Father , do not weep. Mother , do not weep.
Sister , do not weep,” and he went to each and sat on their lap by turns. Then
he rose up, took stick of firewo od and brandishing it about, and said in his
sweet childish treble: “I shall kill the rakshasa with this stick.” The child's
action and speech made them smile in the midst of their tears, but only
added to their great sorrow . Feeling this was the moment for intervention,
Kuntidevi entered and enquired for the cause of their sorrow and whether
there was anything she could do to help them .
The brahmana said: “Mother , this is a sorrow far beyond your aid. There is
a cave near the city, where lives  a cruel and terribly strong rakshasa named
Bakasura. He forcibly seized this city and kingdom thirteen years ago, since
when he has held us in cruel thraldom. The kshatriya ruler of this country
has fled to the city of Vetrakiya and is unable to protect us. This rakshasa
formerly used to issue from his cave whenever he liked and. mad with
hunger , indiscrim inately kill and cut men, women and children  in this city.
The citizens prayed to the rakshasa to come to some sort of stipulation in
place of this promiscuous slaughter . They prayed: ‘Do not kill us wantonly
at your whim and pleasure. Once a week we shall bring you sufficient meat,
rice, curds and intoxicating liquors and many other delicacies. We will
deliver these to you in a carriage drawn by two bullocks driven by a human
being taken from each house in turn. You can make a repast of the rice,
along with the bullocks and the man, but refrain from this mad orgy of
slaughter .’ The rakshasa agreed to the proposal. From that day, this strong
rakshasa has been protecting this kingdom from foreign raids and wild
beasts. This arrangement has been in force for many years.
“No hero has been found to free this country from this pest, for the rakshasa
has invariably defeated and killed all the brave men who tried. Mother , our
legitimate sovereign is unable to protect us. The citizens of a country ,
whose king is weak, should not marry and beget children. A worthy familylife, with culture  and domestic happiness, is possible only under the rule of
a good, strong king. Wife, wealth and other things are not safe, if there be
no proper king ruling over us, and having long suflered with the sight of
others’ sorrow , our own turn has come now to send a person as prey to the
rakshasa. I have not the means to purchase a substitute. None of us can bear
to live after sending one of us to a cruel death, and so I shall go with my
whole family to him. Let the wicked glutton gorge himself with all of us. I
have pained you with these things, but you wished to know . Only God can
help us, but we have lost all hope even of that.”
The political truths contained in this story of Ekachakra are noteworthy and
suggestive.
Kunti talked the matter over with Bhimasena and returned to the brahmana.
She said: “Good man, do not despair . God is great. I have five sons. One of
them will take the food to the rakshasa."
The brahmana jumped up in amazed surprise, but then shook his head sadly
and would not hear of the substituted sacrifice. Kunti said: “O brahmana, do
not be afraid. My son is endowed with superhuman powers derived from
mantras and will certainly kill this rakshasa, as I have myself seen him kill
many other such rakshasas. But keep this a secret, for, if you reveal it, his
power will come to naught."
Kunti’ s fear was that, if the story got noised abroad, Duryod hana’ s men
would see the hand of the Pandavas and find out their whereabouts.
Bhima was filled with unbound ed joy and enthusiasm at the arrangement
made by Kunti. The other brothers returned to the house with alms.
Dharmaputra saw the face of Bhimasena radiant with joy to which it had
long been a stranger and inferred that he was resolved on some hazardous
adventure and questioned Kunti who told him everything.
Yudhishthira said: “What is this? Is not this rash and thoughtless? Relying
on Bhima’ s strength we sleep without care or fear. Is it not through Bhima’ s
strength and daring that we hope  to regain the kingdom that has been seized
by our deceitful enemies? Was it not through the prowess of Bhima that we
escaped from the wax palace? And you are risking the life of Bhima who isour present protection and future  hope. I fear your many trials have clouded
your judgment!”
Kuntidevi replie d: “Dear sons, we have lived happily for many years in the
house of this brahmana. Duty , nay, man’ s highest virtue, is to repay the
benefit he has enjoyed by doing good in his turn. I know the heroism of
Bhima and have no fears; remember who carried us from Varanavata and
who killed the demon Hidimb a. It is our duty to be of service to this
brahmana family .”
Then the citizen s came to the brahmana’ s house with many kinds of meat,
delicacies, jugs of curds and intoxicating liquors, placed in a carriage drawn
by two bullocks . Bhima got into the carriage and set out to the cave of the
rakshasa.
The carriage went forth to the accompaniment of music. When they reached
the accustomed place, the citize ns turned back to safety , leaving Bhima to
go on alone in the carriage. The place in front of the rakshasa’ s den was
noisome with bones, hair and gore and swarmed with vermi n and ants.
Bhima saw that it was littered over with torn off and mutilated  hands, legs
and head s and that foul carrion birds circled overhead sensing food. Bhima
stopped the carriage and began  voraciously to devour the food which had
been meant for the rakshasa, saying to himself: “I must eat the food before
it gets thrown in the confusion of my fight with the rakshasa . Moreover ,
after I slay him, I shall be pollu ted by Contact with this corpse  and cannot
eat the food."
The rakshasa, whose temper had already been chafed by long waiting, was
maddened when he decried what Bhima was doing. Bhima also saw the
rakshasa and challenged him to fight. The rakshasa with his enormous body ,
red moustache, beard and hair, and a mouth stretching from ear to ear, ran
forth towards Bhima who merely smiled unconcerned and, evading the
clutching hands continued to eat with his back to the rakshasa. The rakshasa
rained blows with his fists on the back turned so arrogantly to him, but
Bhima neither noticed him nor stopped eating. The rakshasa uprooted a tree
and threw it at Bhima who still did not even then turn to him but merely
brushed aside the missile with his left hand and continued to eat with his
right. It was only after he had finished even to the last pot of curds, andrinsed his mouth, that he rose up with a sigh of satisfaction and faced the
rakshasa.
A great fight ensued between them. Bhima played with the rakshasa,
throwing him down at will and bidding him rise and fight again. Thus, the
rakshasa was many a time tosse d up by Bhima as though he were a mere
doll of rags. Finally , Bhima threw him down, placed his knee on his back
and broke his bones. The rakshasa uttered a frightful howl of pain and
despair spewing blood and died. Bhima dragged the carcass to the gates of
the city. Returning to the brahma na’s house, he took a bath and then gave an
account of the day’ s deed, to the great delight of his mother .CHAPTER XVI: DRAUPADI’S SWAYAMVARA
WHILE the Pandavas were living in disguise as brahmanas at
Ekachakrapura, news of the swayamvara of Draupadi, the daughter of
Drupada, King of Panchala, reached them. Many brahmanas of
Ekachakrapura planned to go to Panchala in the hope of receiving the
customary gifts and to see the festivities and pageant of a royal wedding.
Kunti, with her motherly instin ct, read her sons’ desire to go to Panchala
and win Draupadi. So she told Yudhishthira: “We have been in this city so
long that it is time to think of going somewhere else. We have seen these
hills and dales till we are tired of them. The alms doled out to us are
diminishing and it is not good to outstay your entertainment. Let us
therefore go to Drupada's kingdom which is reputed to be fair and
prosperous.” Kunti was second to none in worldly wisdom and sagacity and
could gracefully divine her sons’ thoughts and spare them the awkwardness
of expressing them.
The brahmanas went in groups to witness the swayamvara and the Pandavas
mingled with them in the guise of brahmanas. After a long march the party
reached the beautiful city of Drupada and billeted themselves in the house
of a potter as obscure brahmanas of no note.
Though Drupud a and Drona were outwardly at peace, the former never
could forget or forgive the humiliation he had suffered at the latter‘s hands.
Drupada’ s one wish was to give his daughter in marriage to Arjuna.  Drona
loved Arjuna so clearly that he could hardly look upon his pupil’ s father -in-
law as his dead ly foe; and if there were a war, Drupada woul d be all the
stronger for being, Arjuna’ s father -in-law . When he heard the news of the
destruction of the Pandavas at Varanavata, he was plunged in sorrow but
was relieved by a later rumour that they had escaped.
The marriage hall was beautifully decorated and built amidst a finely laid-
out group of new guest-houses designed to accommodate the swayamvara
suitors and guests. Attractive sights and sports had been arrange d for public
entertainment and there were glorious festivities for fourteen days
continuously .A mighty steel bow was placed in the marriage hall. The candi date for the
princess’ hand was required to string the bow and with it shoot a steel arrow
through the central aperture of a revolving disk at a target placed on high.
This required almost superhuman strength and skill, and Drupada
proclaimed that the hero who would win his daughter should perform this
feat.
Many valiant princes had gathered there from all parts of Bharatavarsha.
The sons of Dhritarashtra were  there as well as Karna, Krishna, Sisupala,
Jarasandha and Salya. Besides the competitors there was a huge concourse
of spect ators and visitors. The noise that issued therefrom resembled the
uproar of the ocean and over it all arose the auspicious sound of festal
music from hundreds of instruments, Dhrishtadyumna on horseback rode in
front of his sister Draupadi seated on an elephant. Fresh from her auspicious
bridal bath, and clad in flowing  silk Draupadi dismounted and entered the
swayamvara hall, seeming to fill it with the sweetness of her presence and
perfect beauty . Garland in hand, and coyly glancing at the valiant princes,
who for their part looked at her in speechless admiration, she ascended the
dais. The brahmanas repeated the usual mantras and offered oblations in the
tire. After the peace invocation had been chanted and the flourish of music
had stopped, Dhrishtadyumna took Draupadi by the hand and led her to the
centre of the hall. Then he proclaimed in loud, clear tones:
“Hear ye, O princes seated in state in this assembly , here is the bow. There
is the target and here are the arrows. He who sends five arrows in
succession throu gh the hole of the wheel and unerringly hits the target, if he
also he of good family and prese nce, shall win my sister .” Then  he narrated
to Drau padi the name, ancestry and description of the several suitors
assembled there.
Many noted princes rose one after another and tried in vain to string the
bow; it was too heavy and still for them, and they returned to their places
abashed and ashamed. Sisupala, Jarasandha, Salya and Duryodhana were
among these unsuccessful aspirants.
When Karna came forward, all the assemblage expected that he would be
successful but he failed by just a hair's breadth and the string slid back
flashing and the mighty bow jumped out of his hands like a thing of life.There was great  clamour and angry talk, some even saying that it was an
impossible test put up to shame the kings. Then all noises were hushed, for
there arose from among the group of brahmanas a youth who advanced
towards the bow .
It was Arjuna who had come disguised as a brahmana. When he stood up,
wild clamour burst forth again from the crowd. The brahmanas themselves
were divided in opinion, some being highly delighted that there should be
among them a lad of mettle enough to compete, while others more envious
or worldly wise, said what impudence it was for this brahmacharin to enter
the lists when heroes like Karna, Salya and others had met with failure. But
there were others again who spoke differently as they noted the noble and
shapely proporti ons of the youth . They said: “We feel from his appearance
that he is going to win. He looks sure of himself and he certainly  knows
what he is about. The brahman a may be physically weaker , but is it all a
matter of brute strength? What about the power of austerities? Why should
he not try?” And they blessed him.
Arjuna approached the place where the bow lay and asked Dhrishtadyumna:
“Can a brahman a try to bend the bow?" Dhrishtadyumna answe red: “O best
of brahmanas, my sister will become the life-mate of any one of good
family and presence, who bends the bow and shoots the target. My words
stand and there will be no going back on them."
Then Arjuna meditated on Narayana, the Supreme God and took the bow in
his hand and strung it with ease. He placed an arrow on the string and
looked around him with a smile, while the crowd was lost in spellbound
silence. Then without pause or hesitation he shot five arrows in succession
through the revolving mechanism right into the target so that it fell down.
The crowd was in tumult and there was a blare of musical instruments.
The brahmanas who were seated in the assembly in lar ge numbers sent forth
shouts of joy, waving aloft their deerskins in exultation as though the whole
community had won Draupadi. The uproar that followed was indescribable.
Draupadi shone with a fresh beauty . Her face glowed with happiness which
streamed out of her eyes as she looked on Arjuna. She approach ed him and
placed the garland on his neck. Y udhishthira, Nakula and Sahadeva returned
in haste to the potter’s house to convey the glad news immedia tely to theirmother . Bhima alone remained in the assembly fearing that some danger
might befall Arjuna from the kshatriyas.
As anticipated by Bhima, the princes were loud in wrath. They said: “The
practice of swayamvara, the choosing of a bridegroom, is not prevalent
among the brahmanas. If this maiden does not care to marry a prince, she
should remain a virgin and burn herself on the pyre. How can a brahmana
marry her? We should oppose this marriage and prevent it so as to protect
righteousness and save the practice of swayamvara from the peril which
threatens it.” A free fight seemed imminent. Bhima plucked a tree by the
roots, and stripping it of foliage, stood armed with this formidable
bludgeon, by the side of Arjuna ready for any event. Draupadi said nothing
but stood holding on to the skirts of the deerskin in which Arjuna was clad.
Krishna, Balarama and others sought to appease the princes who had
created the confusion. Arjuna  proceeded to the house of the potter
accompanied by Draupadi.
As Bhima and Arjuna were taking Draupadi to their temporary abode,
Dhrishtadyumna followed them at a distance, and, unseen by them, closely
observed everything that took place there. He was amazed and delighted at
what he saw, and returning, he secretly told King Drupada: “Father , I think
they are the Pandavas. Draupadi accompanied them, holding to the skirts of
the deerskin of that youth and she was not at all abashed. I also followed
and I saw all five and a venerable and august lady who, I have no doubt, is
Kunti herself.”
Invited by Drupada, Kunti and the Pandavas went to the palace.
Dharmaputra confided to the king that they were the Pandavas; he also
informed him of their decision  to marry Draupadi in commo n. Drupada
rejoiced at knowing that they were the Pandavas, which set at rest all
anxiety regardin g the enmity of Drona, but was surprised and disgusted
when he heard that they would jointly marry Draupadi.
Drupada oppose d this and said “How unrighteous! How did this idea get
into your head, this immoral idea that goes against the traditional usage?"
Yudhishthira answered: “O king, kindly excuse us. In a time of great peril
we vowed that we would share all things in common and we cannot breakthat pledge. Our mother has commanded us so.”
Finally Drupada yielded and the marriage was celebrated.CHAPTER XVII: INDRAPRASTHA
WHEN news of the incidents that took place during the swayamvara at
Panchala reached Hastinapura, Vidura was happy . He immediately went to
Dhritarashtra and said: “O King, our family has become stronger because
the daug hter of Drupada has become our daughter -in-law . Our stars are
good."
Dhritarashtra thought in his blind fondness for his son that it was
Duryodhana, who had also gone to take part in the swayamvara, that had
won Draupadi. Under this mista ken impression he replied: “It is indeed, as
you say, a good  time for us. Go at once and bring Draupadi. Let us give
Panchali a joyous welcome.”
Vidura hastened  to correct the mistake. He said: “The blessed Pandavas are
alive and it is Arjuna who has won the daughter of Drupada. The five
Pandavas have married her jointly according to the rites enjoined by the
sastras. With their mother Kuntidevi they are happy and well under the care
of Drupada." At these words of Vidura, Dhritarashtra felt frustrated but
concealed his disappointment.
He said to Vidura with apparent joy: “O Vidura, I am delighted at your
words. Are the dear Pandavas really alive? We have been mourning them as
dead! The news you have now brought is balm to my heart. So the daughter
of Drupada has become our daughter -in-law . Well, well, very good.”
Duryodhana’ s jealousy and hatred redoubled when he found that the
Pandavas had somehow escaped  from the wax palace and after spending a
year incognito had now become even more powerful on account of the
alliance with the mighty king of Panchala .
Duryodhana and his brother Dushasana went to their uncle Sakuni and said
in sorrow: “Uncle, we are undone. We have been let down by relying on
Purochana: Our enemies, the Pandavas, are cleverer than ourselves, and
fortune also seems to favour them. Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin have
become their allies. What can we do?”
Karna and Dury odhana went to the blind Dhritarashtra. Duryodhana said:
“You told Vidura that better days were ahead of us. Is it ‘good time’ for usthat our natural enemies, the Pandavas, have so waxed in strength that they
will certainly destroy us? We could not carry out our plot against them and
the fact that they know about it is an added danger . It has now come to this
—either we must destroy them here and now or we shall ourse lves perish.
Favour us with your counsel in this matter ."
Dhritarashtra replied: “Dear son, what you say is true. We should not,
however , let Vidura know our mind. That was why I spoke to him in that
manner . Let me now hear your suggestions as to what we should do.”
Duryodhana said:
"I feel so distracted that no plan occurs to me. Perhaps, we may take
advantage of the fact that these Pandavas are not born of one and the same
mother and create enmity betwe en the sons of Madri and those of Kunti: we
can also try to bribe Drupada into joining our side. That he has given away
his daughter in marriage to the Pandavas will not stand in the way of our
making him an ally. There is nothing that cannot be accomplished by the
power of wealth.”
Karna smiled and said: “This is but futile talk."
Duryodhana continued: “We should somehow make sure that the Pandavas
do not come here and deman d of us the kingdom that is now in our
possession. We may commission a few brahmanas to spread convenient
rumours in Drupada's city and severely tell the Pandavas that they would
meet with great danger if they were to go to Hastinapura. Then the
Pandavas would fear to come here and we shall be safe from them."
Karna replied: “This too is idle talk. Y ou cannot frighten them that way ."
Duryodhana continued: “Can we not create discord among the Pandavas by
means of Draupadi? Her polyandrous marriage is very convenient for us.
We shall arouse  doubts and jealousies in their minds through the efforts of
experts in the science of erotics. We shall certainly succeed. We can get a
beautiful woma n to beguile some of the sons of Kunti and thus make
Draupadi turn against them. If Draupadi begins to suspect any of them, we
can invite him to Hastinapura and use him so that our plan prospers.”Karna laughed this also to scorn. He said: “None of your proposals is any
good. You cannot conquer the Pandavas by stratagem. When they were here
and were like callow birds with undeveloped wings, we found we could not
deceive them, and you think we can deceive them now, when they have
acquired experi ence and are moreover under the protection of Drupada.
They have seen through your designs. Stratagems will not do hereafter . You
cannot sow dissensions amon g them. You cannot bribe the wise and
honourable Drupada. He will not give up the Pandavas on any account.
Draupadi also can never be turned against them. Therefore, there is only
one way left for us, and that is to attack them before they grow stronger and
other friends join them. We should make a surprise attack on the Pandavas
and Drupada before Krishna joins them with his Yadava army . We should
take the heroic way out of our difficulty , as befits kshatriyas. Trickery will
prove useless."
Thus spoke Karna. Dhritarashtra could not make up his mind. The king,
therefore, sent for Bhishma and Drona and consulted them.
Bhishma was very happy when  he heard that the Pandavas were alive and
well as guests of King Drupad a of Panchala, whose daughter they had
married. Consul ted on the steps  to be taken, Bhishma, wise with the ripe
knowledge of right and wrong , replied: “The proper course will be to
welcome them back and give them half the kingdom. The citizens of the
state also desire such a settlement. This is the only way to maintain the
dignity of our family . There is.much loose talk not creditable to you about
the fire incident at the wax hous e. All blame, even all suspicion, will be set
at rest if you invite the Pandavas and hand over half kingdom to them. This
is my advice."
Drona also gave the same counsel and suggested sending a proper
messenger to bring about an amicable settlement and establish peace.
Karna flew into a rage at this suggestion. He was very much devoted to
Duryodhana and could not at all bear the idea of giving a portion of the
kingdom to the Pandavas. He told Dhritarashtra:
“I am surprised that Drona, who has received wealth and honours at your
hands, has made such a sugges tion. A king should examine critically theadvice of his ministers before accepting or rejecting it."
At these words of Karna, Drona , his old eyes full of anger , said: “O wicked
man, you are advising the king to go on the wrong path. If Dhritarashtra
does not do what Bhishma and myself have advised, the Kauravas will
certainly meet with destruction in the near future.”
Then Dhritarashtra sought the advice of V idura who replied :
“The counsel given by Bhishma, the head of our race, and Drona, the
master , is wise and just and should not be disregarded. The Pandavas are
also your children like Duryodhana and his brothers. You should  realise that
those who advise you to injure the Pandavas, are really bent upon the
destruction of the race. Drupad a and his sons as well as Krishna and the
Yadavas are staunch allies of the Pandavas. It is impossible to defeat them
in battle. Karna’ s advice is foolish and wrong. It is bruited abroad that we
tried to kill the Pandavas in the wax house, and we should first of all try to
clear ourselves of the blame. The citizens and the whole country are
delighted to know that the Pand avas are alive and they desire to see them
once again. Do not listen to the words of Duryodhana. Karna and Sakuni
are but raw youths, ignorant of statesmanship and incompetent to advise.
Follow Bhishma’ s advice.”
In the end Dhritarashtra determined to establish peace by giving half the
kingdom to the sons of Pandu. He sent Vidura to the kingdom of Panchala
to fetch the Pandavas and Draupadi.
Vidura went to the city of King  Drupada in a speedy vehicle taking along
with him many kinds of jewels and other valuable presents.
Vidura rendered  due honour to King Drupada and requested him on behalf
of Dhritarashtra to send the Pandavas with Panchali to Hastinapura.
Drupada mistrus ted Dhritarashtr a, but he merely said: “The Pandavas may
do as they like.”
Vidura went to Kuntidevi and prostrated himself before her. She said: “Son
of Vichitravirya , you saved my sons. They are, therefore, your children. I
trust you. I shall do as you advise." She was also suspicious of
Dhritarashtra’ s intentions.Vidura thus assured her: “Your children will never meet with destruction.
They will inherit the kingdom and acquire great renown. Come, let us go.”
At last Drupada  also gave his assent and Vidura returned to Hastinapura
with the Pandavas, Kunti and Draupadi.
In jubilant welcome of the beloved princes who were returning home after
long years of exile and travail, the streets of Hastinapura had been sprinkled
with water and decorated with flowers. As had been already decided, half
the kingdom was made over to the Pandavas and Y udhishthira was duly
crowned king.
Dhritarashtra blessed the newly crowned Yudhishthira and bade him
farewell with these words:
‘My brother Pandu made this kingdom prosperous. May you prove a
worthy heir to his renown! King Pandu delighted in abiding by my advice.
Love me in the same manner . My sons are wicked and proud. I have made
this settlement so that there may be no strife or hatred between  you. Go to
Khandava- prastha and make it your capital. Our ancestors  Pururavas,
Nahusha and Yayati ruled the kingdom from there. That was our ancient
capital. Reestablish that and be famous.”
In this manner Dhritarashtra spoke affectionately to Yudhishthira. The
Pandavas renovated that ruined city, built palaces and forts and renamed it
Indraprastha, and it grew in wealth and beauty and became the admiration
of the world. The Pandavas ruled there happily for thirty-six years with
their mother and Draupadi never straying from the path of dharma.CHAPTER XVIII: THE SARANGA BIRDS
IN the stories narrated in the Puranas, birds and beasts speak like men, and
sometimes they give sound advice and even teach spiritual wisd om. But the
natural qualities of those creatures are adroitly made to peep through this
human veil.
One of the characteristic beauties of the Puranic literature is this happy
fusion of nature and imaginatio n. In a delightful passage in the Ramayana,
Hanuman, who is described as very wise and learned, is made to frolic with
apish joy, when  he imagined that the beautiful damsel he saw at Ravana’ s
inner courtyard was Sita.
It is usual to entertain children  with stories in which birds and beasts are
made to speak. But the stories of the Puranas are meant for elderly people,
and in them usually some background is given in explanation  of animals
having the gift of human speech. The usual expedient employed is a
previous birth when those creatures were human beings. For instance, a
deer was a rishi in a previous birth, or a fox a king - the subsequent
degradation being due to a curse. In such cases the deer will act as a deer
and yet speak as a rishi, and in the fox the vulpine nature is shot through
with the characteristics of a wise and experienced king. The stories are
thereby made interesting vehicles of the great truths they sometimes
convey .
Khandavaprastha, that forest full of uneven places and thorns and prickles
and cumbered with the crumbling vestiges of a long dead city, was indeed a
frightful place when it came into the possession of the Pandavas. Birds and
beasts had made  it their abode, and it was infested with thieves and wicked
men. Krishna and Arjuna resolv ed to set fire to the forest and construct a
new city in its place .
A saranga bird was living there with its four fledgelings. The male bird was
pleasantly roaming about in the forest with another female bird neglecting
wife and childr en. The mother bird looked after its young ones. As the
forest was set on fire as commanded by Krishna and Arjuna and the fire
spread in all directions, doing its destructive work, the worried mother birdbegan to lament: ‘The fire is coming nearer and nearer burning everything,
and soon it will be here and destroy us. All forest creatures are in despair
and the air is full of the agonising crash of falling trees. Poor wingless
babies! You will become a prey to the fire. What shall I do? Your father has
deserted us, and I am not strong enough to fly away carrying you with me.”
To the mother who was wailing thus, the children said:
“Mother , do not torment yourself on our account: leave us to our fate. If we
die here, we shall attain a good birth in some future life. If you give up your
life for our sake, our family will become extinct. Fly to a place of safety
take another mate and be happy . You will soon have other children and be
able to for get us. Mother , reflect and do what is best for our race.”
Despite this earnest entreaty , the mother had no mind to leave her children.
She said: “I shall remain here and perish in the flames with you.”
This is the back ground of the story of the birds: A rishi named Mandapala
long lived faithf ul to his vow of perfect brahmacharya; but when he sought
entry to the higher regions, the gatekeeper said: “There is no place here for
a childless man" and turned him back. He was then born as a saranga bird
and lived with a female companion named Jarita. She laid four eggs. Then
he left Jarita and wandered in the woods with another female companion,
Lapita.
The four eggs of Jarita hatched in time and they were the four birds
mentioned abov e. As they were the children of a rishi they could cheer and
encourage their mother in the way they did.
The mother bird told her children: “There is a rat-hole by the side of this
tree. I shall put you there. You can get into the hole and escape the fire. I
shall close the mouth of the hole with earth and the fire will not touch you.
When the fire dies down I shall let you out.”
The children would not agree. They said: “The rat in the hole will devour
us. It is better to perish in the flames than to die ignobly by being eaten up
by rats.”
The mother bird tried to relieve the fears of the children and said: “I saw an
eagle devour the rat There is now no danger for you inside the hole.”But the children said: “There are sure to be other rats in the hole. Our
danger is not ended by the killing of one rat by the eagle. Kindly save your
life by flying before the fire reaches us and this tree catches fire. We cannot
get into the rat-h ole. Why should you sacrifice your life for our sake? How
have we merited it, who have done nothing for you’? We have only brought
you unhappiness since we came into the world. Take another mate and live
happily . We shall ascend to higher regions if we are consumed in the fire:
and if we providentially escape  you can look for us here when  you return
after the fire has subsided. Do not delay . Go at once.” Urged by the children
the mother bird flew away .
The flames enveloped the tree but the little birds remained unperturbed and
spent their time chirping merrily to one another .
The eldest said: “The wise man will scent danger before hand and hold his
mind from wavering when danger comes."
The younger brothers replied: “You are old and wise. Only a rare soul will
be firm like you .
With smiling faces, all of them  greeted the fire when it approached them,
with the following words:
“O fire, our mother has left us. W e have not seen our father , for after we had
been hatched he was no more to be seen. Primal one, smoke is your flag.
You are our sole refuge wingless and helpless as we are. There is no one
else to take care of us. We throw ourselves on your protection. ” Thus they
prayed to the Fire god like brahmana brahmacharins reciting  the Vedic
chants.
The fire which destroyed the whole forest, mercifully left the baby birds
unscathed.
When the fire had subsided, the mother bird came back and saw with
wonder that her children were  safe and chirping merrily; she embraced
them and was intensely happy .
While the fire was raging, the male bird, anxious for the safety of his young
ones, had expressed his fears to his new love-bird Lapit a. She had
petulantly up-braidcd him. Hearing his repeated laments “Is it so?” she said:‘‘I know your mind, I know that you desire to go back to Jarita,  having had
enough of me. Why falsely bring in the fire and the children? You have
yourself told me that the childre n of Jarita would never perish in fire since
the Fire god has given you that boon. You may as well tell the truth and go
away , if you like, to your belove d Jarita. I shall only be another of the many
trusting females betrayed by unworthy males and cast out wand ering in the
forest. Y ou may go.”
The bird Mandapala said: “Your assumption is untrue. I took birth as a bird
for obtaining children and I am naturally anxious about them. I shall just go
and see them and then come back to you.” Having thus conso led his new
mate, he went to the tree where Jarita was seated.
Jarita paid no attention to her consort but remained absorbed in joy at
finding her children alive. Then she turned to her husband and asked in an
indifferent tone why he had come.
He replied with affection: “Are my children happy? Who is the eldest
among them?”
Then Jarita cut in icily: “Do you greatly care? Go back to her for whom you
abandoned me. Be happy with her .”
Mandapala philosophised: “A woman will not care for her husband after
she has become a mother . Such is the way of the world. Even the blameless
Vasishtha was thus ignored by Arundhati.”CHAPTER XIX: JARASANDHA
THE Pandavas ruled Indraprastha in all glory . Those who surrounded
Yudhishthira urged him to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice and assume the
title of “Empero r.” It is evident that imperialism had an irresisti ble glamour
even in those days.
Yudhishthira sought Sri Krishn a's advice in this matter . When Krishna
learnt that Dharmaputra desired to see him, he set out in a chariot harnessed
with swift horses and reached Indraprastha.
Yudhishthira said: “My people urge me to perform Rajasuya, but as you
know , only he who can secure the respect and allegiance of all kings, can
perform that sacrifice and win the status of emperor . Advise me. You are
not among those whose affection  makes them blind and partial. Nor are you
one of those who advise to please and whose counsel is pleasan t rather than
true or wholesome.”
Krishna replied:  “Quite so - and that is why you cannot be emperor while
the mighty Jarasandha of Magadha is alive and unconquered. He has
conquered many kings and holds them in subjection. All the Kshatriyas -
including the redoubtable Sisupa la himself-are afraid of his prowess and are
submissive to him. Have you not heard of the wicked Kamsa, the son of
Ugrasena? After  he had become  the son-in-law and ally of Jarasandha I and
my peop le attacked Jarasandha. After three years of continuous fighting we
had to acknowledge defeat and we left Mathura and moved to Dwaraka in
the west, and built a new city where we are living in peace and plenty . Even
if Duryodhana, Karna and others do not object to your assuming the title of
emperor , Jarasandha will certain ly oppose it, and the only way to overcome
his opposition is to defeat and kill him. You can then not only perform the
Rajasuya but also rescue and win the adherence of the kings who languish
in his prisons.”
At these words of Krishna, Yudhishthira said: “I agree. I am but one of the
many kings who rule their kingdoms with fairness and justic e and lead
happy unambitious lives. It is mere vanity and vainglory to desire to
become an emperor . Why should not a king rest satisfied with his ownkingdom? So, I shall give up this desire to be an emperor , and. really , the
title has no temptations for me. It is my brothers who wish it. When you
yourself are afraid of Jarasandha what can we hope to do?"
Bhima did not at all like this spirit of pusillanimous contentment. .
Bhima said: “Ambition is the noblest virtue of a king. What is the good of
being strong if one does not know his own strength? I cann ot reconcile
myself to live a life of idle ease and contentment. He who casts off
indolence and properly employ s political means, can conquer even those
stronger than himself. Strength reinforced by stratagem will surely do
much. What, indeed, cannot be accomplished by a combination of my
physical strength, Krishna’ s wisdom and Arjuna’ s dexterity? We can
conquer Jarasan dha’s might, if we three join and set about it without doubts
or fears.”
Krishna interposed: “Jarasandha should certainly be slain and fully deserves
it. He has unjustly cast eighty-six princes in prison. He has planned to
immolate a hundred kings and is waiting to lay hold of fourte en more. If
Bhima and Arjuna agree, I shall  accompany them and together we will slay
that king by stratagem and set free the imprisoned princes.  I like this
suggestion.”
Yudhishthira was not pleased with this advice. He said: “This may really
mean sacrificing Bhima and Arjuna who are to me as my two eyes, merely
to gratify a vain desire to be an emperor . I do not like to send them on this
dangerous errand It seems to me far better to give up the idea altogether ."
Arjuna said: “What is the use to us of an existence without heroic deeds,
born as we are of an illustrious line? A kshatriya, though endowed with all
other good qualities, will not become famous if he does not exert himself.
Enthusiasm is the mother of success. We can seize fortune if we do our
duties energetically . Even a powerful man may fail if, through lassitude, he
does not employ the means he has. Failure is due, in the vast majority of
cases, to ignorance of one’s own strength. We know we are strong, and we
are not afraid of using our strength to the utmost. Why should Yudhishthira
suppose that we are incapable of this? When we have become old, it will be
time to assume the ochre robe, resort to the forest and pass the rest of ourdays in penance  and austerities. Now , we should lead strenuous lives and do
heroic deeds worthy of the traditions of our race.”
Krishna was delighted to hear these words and said:
“What else can Arjuna, born of Kunti in the Bharata race, advise? Death
comes to all, the hero as well as the sluggard; but the nobles t duty of a
kshatriya is to be true to his race and faith, and overcoming his foes in
righteous battle, to win glory .”
Finally Yudhishthira assented to the unanimous opinion that their duty lay
in slaying Jarasandha.
This conversation has a curiously modern ring about it and shows that
powerful men in ancient days used very much the same specious reasoning
as now .CHAPTER XX: THE SLAYING OF
JARASANDHA
BRIHADRA THA, the commander of three regiments, reigned in the
kingdom of Magadha and attain ed celebrity as a great hero. He married the
twin daughters of the raja of Kasi and vowed to them that he would not
show any partiality to either .
Brihadratha was not blessed with a child for a long time. When  he became
old, he handed over his kingdom  to his ministers, went to the forest with his
two wives and engaged him, self in austerities. He went to Sage  Kausika of
the Gautama family , with a sorrowful longing for children in his heart, and
when the sage was moved with pity and asked him what he wanted, he
answered: “I am childless and have come to the forest giving up my
kingdom: give me children.”
The sage was filled with compassion and, even as he was thinking how to
help the king, a mango fruit fell into his lap. He took it and gave it to the
king with this blessing: “T ake it. Y our wish will be fulfilled,”
The king cut the fruit into two halves and gave one to each wife. He did so
to keep his vow not to show partiality to either . Some time after they had
partaken of the fruit, the wives became pregnant. The delivery took place in
due course; but instead of bringing the expected joy, it plunged them into
greater grief than before, for they each gave birth to but a half of a child-
each half a monstrous birth which seemed a revolting lump.  They were
indeed two equal and complem entary portions of one baby , consisting of
one eye, one leg, half a face, one ear and so on.
Seized with grief, they comma nded their attendants to tie the gruesome
pieces in a cloth and cast them away . The attendants did as they were
instructed and threw the cloth bundle on a heap of refuse in the street.
A cannibal rakshasi chanced upon that place. She was elated at seeing the
two pieces of flesh and, as she gathered them up both at once, accidently
the halves came together the right way, and they at once adher ed together
and chan ged into a whole living  child, perfect in every detail. The surprised
rakshasi did not wish to kill the child. She took on the guise of a beautifulwoman and, going to the king, presented the child to him saying: “This is
your child.”
The king was immensely delighted and handed it over to his two wives.
This child became known as Jarasandha. He grew up into a man of
immense physic al strength, but his body had one weakness - namely , that
being made up by the fusion of two separate parts, it could be split again
into two, if suf ficient force were used
This interesting story embodies the important truth that two sundered parts
joined together will still remain weak, with a tendency to split.
When the conqu est and slaying of Jarasandha had been resolved upon, Sri
Krishna said: “Hamsa, Hidimb aka, Kamsa and other allies of Jarasandha
are no more: and now that he is isolated, this is the right time to kill him. It
is useless to fight with armies. He must be provoked to a single combat and
slain.”
According to the code of honour  of those days, a kshatriya had to accept the
challenge to a duel - whether with or without weapons. The latter son was a
fight to the death with weighted gauntlets or a wrestling to the death in
catch- as-catch can style. This was the kshatriya tradition to which Krishna
and the Pandavas had recourse for slaying Jarasandha.
They disguised themselves as men who had taken religious vows, clad in
robes of bark-fibre and carrying  the holy darbha grass in their hands. Thus
they entered the kingdom of Magadha and arrived at the capital of
Jarasandha.
Jarasandha was disturbed by portents of ill-omen. To ward off the
threatened danger , he had propitiatory rites performed by the priests and
himself took to fasts and penance. Krishna, Bhima and Arjuna  entered the
palace unarmed. Jarasandha received them with respect as their noble
bearing seemed to indicate an illustrious origin. Bhima and Arjuna made no
reply to his words of welcome because they wished to avoid having to tell
lies.
Krishna spoke on their behalf: “These two are observing a vow of silence
for the present as a part of their austerities. They can speak  only aftermidnight.” Jarasandha entertained them in the hall of sacrifice and returned
to the palace.
It was the practi ce of Jarasandha to meet noble guests who had taken vows
and talk to them at their leisure and convenience, and so he called at
midnight to see them. Their conduct made Jarasandha suspicious, and he
also observed that they had on their hands the scars made by the bow-string
and had besides the proud bearing of kshatriyas.
When Jarasandha demanded the truth of them they said frankly: “We are
your foes and seek instant combat. You can choose one of us at will to fight
with you.”
After acquainting himself as to who they were, Jarasandha said: “Krishna,
you are a cowherd and Arjuna is a mere boy. Bhima is famous for his
physical strength . So, I wish to fight with him." Since Bhima was unarmed,
Jarasandha chivalrously agreed to fight him without weapons.
Bhima and Jarasandha were so equally matched in strength that they fought
with each other continuously for thirteen days without taking rest or
refreshments, while Krishna and Arjuna looked on in alternating hope and
anxiety . On the fourteenth day, Jarasandha showed signs of exhaustion, and
Krishna prompte d Bhima that the time had come to make an end of him. At
once Bhima lifted him and whirling him round and round a hundred times,
dashed him to the earth and seizing his legs tore his body asund er into two
halves. And Bhima roared in exultation.
The two halves at once joined and Jarasandha, thus made whole, leapt up
into vigorous life and again attacked Bhima.
Bhima aghast at the sight, was at a loss what to do when he saw Krishna
pick up a straw , tear it into two, and cast the bits in opposite directions.
Bhima took the hint and when once again he tore Jarasandha as under he
threw the two por tions in opposite directions, so that they could not come
together and join. Thus did Jarasandha meet his end.
The captive princes were released and Jarasandha’ s son was crowned King
of Magadha and Krishna, Bhima and Arjuna returned to Indraprastha.With Jarasandha gone, the way was now clear for the Rajasuya which the
Pandavas performed with great pomp and splendour . Yudhishthira assumed
the title of “Emp eror”. The celebrations were marred by only one incident.
Towards the close of the festive celebrations, at the time of paying the first
honour , Sisupal a behaved disrespectfully in the assembly of princes and
provoked a fight with Krishna in which he was slain. This story is told in
the next chapter .CHAPTER XXI: THE FIRST HONOUR
THE practice of staging a “walk-out” from an assembly in protest against
something is nothing new. We learn from the Mahabharata that “walk-out”
was resorted to even in ancient times.
The India of those days consi sted of 21 number of independent states.
Though there was one dharma and one culture throughout the land, the
autonomy of each state was scrupulously respected. Occasionally , some
strong and ambi tious monarch would seek the assent of his compeers to his
overlordship, which would sometimes be given without question. After
receiving this assent he would perform a grand Rajasuya sacrifice which all
the acqu iescing kings would attend in token of acknowledgement of his
supremacy . In accordance with this custom, the Pandavas invited the other
kings after the slaying of Jarasandha and performed the Rajasuya.
The time came for doing the honours of the occasion. The custom was to
render first hono ur to the guest who was considered most worth y of taking
precedence over all others. The question arose as to who should be
honoured first. The grandsire was emphatically of opinion that Sri Krishna,
the king of Dwaraka, should be honoured first, which  was also
Yudhishthira’ s own opinion.
Yudhishthira followed the advice and under his instructions Sahadeva
offered to Sri Krishna the honours enjoined by tradition.
Sisupala, the king of Chedi, who hated Krishna as wickednes s alone can
hate goodness, could not tolerate it.
He laughed aloud in derision and said: “How ridiculous and unjust, but I am
not surprised. The man who sought advice was born in illegitimacy . (This
was an insulting  allusion to the sons of Kunti.) The man who gave advice
was born of one who ever declines from high to low. (This is in reference to
the fact that Bhishma was born of Ganga, the river naturally flowing from
higher to lower levels.) And he who did the honours was also born
illegitimately . And what shall I say of the man honoured! A fool by birth
and a cowherd by breeding. Dumb indeed must be the members of this
assembly if they have not a word to say to this! This is no place for worthymen.” Some of the assembled princes applauded Sisupala. Encouraged by
their applause he addressed Y udhishthira:
“When there are so many kings  gathered here, it is a shame that you paid
the first honour to Krishna. Not to render respect where it is rightly due and
to rende r it where it is not merited are both equally grave offences. It is a
pity that, for all your imperial pretensions you are ignorant of this."
Getting more and more angry as he spoke, he continued: “Ignoring the
many kings and heroes who are here at your own invitation and in
malicious despis e of them, you have paid royal honours to a cowherd boor,
a mere nobody: Vasudeva, the father of Krishna, was but a servant of
Ugrasena. He is not even of royal blood. Is this the place and the occasion
to show your vulgar partiality for Krishna, the son of Devaki? Is this worthy
of the children of Pandu‘? O sons of Pandu, you are raw, untaught youths,
altogether ignor ant of the way to conduct a royal assembly . This dotard
Bhishma guided you foolishly and thus made fools of you. Krishna-why ,
Krishna is no ruler at all! O Yudhishthira, why did you dare to do this
wretch first hono ur in this illust rious assemblage of kings? He has not even
the merit of age—and if you admire grey hair, is not his father alive? You
could not have honoured him as your preceptor surely , for your preceptor is
Drona who is here in this assembly . Is it as an expert in performing
sacrifices that you have honour ed him? It cannot be, for Vyasa, the great
master , is present. It would have been better even if you had paid the first
honour to Bhishma, for dotard as he is, he has still the merit of being the
oldest man of your house. Your family teacher , Kripacharya, is also present
in this assembly . How could you then pay the first honour to this cowherd?
Aswatthama, the hero who is expert in all sastras, is here. How did you
choose Krishna, for getting him?
“Among the princes assembled here, there is Duryodhana. And there is also
Karna, the discip le of Parasurama. Is he not the hero who fough t Jarasandha
single-handed and defeated him? Leaving him aside, out of childish
partiality , you chose Krishna for the first honour -Krishna who is neither
royal, nor heroic, nor learned, nor holy, nor even hoary-who is nothing but a
low cowherd! Thus you have dishonoured us all, whom you have invited
here.“O kings, it is not out of fear that we assented to Yudhishthira ’s assuming
the title of ‘emperor ’. We perso nally do not much care whether he is friend
or foe. But, having heard much prate of his righteousness, we wanted to see
him uphold the flag of dharrna. He has now wantonly dishonoured us, after
all that talk of virtue and dharma. What virtue or dharma was there in his
giving priority of honour to this villain Krishna who killed Jaras andha in an
unjust manner? You should henceforth call Yudhishthira an unrighteous
person.
“O Krish na, what impudence on your part to accept the undeserved honour
which these misguided Pandava s did you! Did you forget yourself? Or did
you forget decent tradition? Or was it just a case of a dog snatching at a
remnant of food which nobody cared to claim or guard? Do you not really
see that this farce is a ghastly mockery and disgrace to yourse lf? It is like
the mockery of showing beau tiful things to a blind man or offering a
maiden in marriage to a eunuch. Likewise, these kingly honours are really
an af front to you.
“It is now evident that the would-be emperor Yudhishthira, the senile
Bhishma, and this fellow Krishna are all made of the same stuf f.”
After Sisupala had spoken these harsh words, he rose from his seat and
walked out calling upon the other kings to join him in resentin g the insult.
Many of them followed him.
Yudhishthira ran after them and tried to appease them with sweet words of
peace but in vain, for they were too angry to be appeased . Sisupala‘s
aggressive vanity waxed to fighting pitch and there ensued a terrible fight
between Krishna and Sisupala, in which the latter was slain.
The Rajasuya was duly celebrated and Y udhishthira recognised emperor .CHAPTER XXII: SAKUNI COMES IN
AT the close of the Rajasuya, the princes, priests and elders, who had
gathered for the purpose, took leave and returned to their places. Vyasa also
came to say farewell. Dharmaputra rose and received him with due respect
and sat by his side. The sage said: “O son of Kunti, you have got the title of
‘emperor ’ which you eminently deserve. May the illustrious Kuru race gain
even greater glory through you. Give me leave to return to my hermitage.”
Yudhishthira touched the feet of his progenitor and guru and said: “O
master , you alone can remove my apprehensions: wise men have predicted
from portents the happenings of catastrophic events. Has this prediction
been fulfilled by the death of Sisupala or is more to ensue?”
Bhagavan Vyasa replied: “Dear  child, much of sorrow and suffering is in
store for thirteen  years to come.  The portents indicate the destru ction of the
kshatriya race and are not exhausted with the death of Sisupala. Far from it.
Hundreds of kings will perish, and the old order of things will pass away .
This catastroph e will spring out of the enmity between you and your
brothers on the one side and your cousins, the Dhritarashtras on the other . It
will culm inate in a war resultin g in practical annihilation of the kshatriya
race. No one can go against destiny. Be firm and steadfast in righteousness.
Be vigilant and rule the kingdom, farewell.” And Vyasa blessed
Yudhishthira.
Vyasa’ s words filled Yudhishth ira with grief and with a great repugnance
for worldly ambition and life itself. He informed his brothers of the
prediction of unavoidable racial disaster . Life seemed to him a bitter and
weary business and his destiny particularly cruel and unbearable.
Arjuna said: “You are a king and it is not right for you to be agitated. Let us
meet destiny with undaunted front and do our duty .”
Yudhishthira replied: “Brothers, may God protect us and give us wisdom.
For my part, I take this vow never to speak harshly to my brothers or to my
kinsmen for the next thirteen years. I shall avoid all pretext for conflict. I
shall never give way to anger , which is the root cause of enmity ; it shall be
my study to give no occasion for anger or pretext for hostility . Thus shallwe profit by Bhagavan Vyasa’ s warning." His brothers expressed cordial
assent.
The first event of the series which culminated in the devastatin g slaughter
on the blood-sodden field of Kurukshetra and the event which was the evil
root of all, was the gambling match into which Yudhishthira was inveigled
by Sakuni, who was Duryodhan a’s evil genius. Why did the wise and good
Yudhishthira suffer himself to be persuaded to this step which he must have
known to hold evil possibilities?
The main cause was his fixed resolve to be on amicable terms with his
cousins by not opposing their wishes and a friendly invitation to dice could
not be summaril y turned down, since the etiquette of those days made it a
point of honour to accept a game  of equal hazard. Out of his very anxiety to
foster goodwill, he laid open the field for the poisonous seed of hatred and
death. Here is an illustration of the futility of human plans, however well-
meant or wise, without divine aid. Our best wisdom is vain against fate, and
if destiny is kind, our very follies turn to our advantage.
While Dharmaputra was careworn with solicitude to avoid a quarrel at all
costs, Duryodhana was burning with jealousy at the thought of the
prosperity of the Pandavas which he had witnesse d in their capita l during
the Rajasuya sacrifice. Duryod hana saw unprecedented wealth , attractive
and sight- eluding crystal doors and many pieces of exquisite artistry in the
court-hall of Yudhishthira, all suggestive of great prosperity . He also saw
how glad the kings of many countries were to become the allies of the
Pandavas. This gave him unbear able grief. He was so absorbed in sorrow at
the prosperity of the Pandavas that he did not at first hear Sakuni who was
by his side, speaking to him.
Sakuni asked: “Why are you sighing? Why are you torm ented with
sorrow?"
Duryodhana replied: “Yudhishthira, surrounded by his brothers, is like
Indra, the king of gods. Before the very eyes of the assembled kings
Sisupala was slain and not one of them had the courage to come forward to
avenge him. Like the vaisyas who live by trade, they battered their honourand jewels and riches for Yudhishthira’ s goodwill. Now can I avoid giving
way to grief after seeing all this? What is the good of living?”
Sakuni said: “O Duryodhana, the Pandavas are your brothers. It is not right
on your part to be jealous of their prosperity . They are but enjoying their
legitimate inheritance. By their good fortune they have prospered and
flourished witho ut doing any injury to others. Why should you be jealous?
How can their strength and happiness diminish your greatness? Your
brothers and relations stand by you and obey you. Drona, Aswa tthama and
Karna are on your side. Why do you grieve when Bhishma, Kripa,
Jayadratha, Somadatta and myself are your supporters? You can conquer
even the whole world. Do not give way to grief."
At these words, Duryodhana said: “O Sakuni, it is true that I have so many
to support me. Why should we not wage war and drive the Pandavas out of
Indraprastha? "
But Sakuni said: “No. That will not be easy, but I know a way to drive
Yudhishthira out of Indraprastha without a fight or the shedding of blood.”
The eyes of Duryodhana lighted up, but it seemed too good to be true. He
asked incredulously: “Uncle, is it possible to overcome the Pandavas
without sacrificing any life? What is your plan?"
Sakuni replied: “Yudhishthira is fond of the game of dice and being
unskilful, is altogether ignorant of its tricks and the opportunity it offers to
cleverer people. If we invite him to a game, he would accept, following the
tradition of the kshatriyas. I know the tricks of the game and I shall play on
your behalf. Yudhishthira will be helpless as a child against me. I shall win
his kingdom and wealth for you without shedding a drop of blood.”CHAPTER XXIII: THE INVITATION
DUR YODHANA and Sakuni went to Dhritarashtra. Sakuni opened the
conversation. He said: “O king, Duryodhana is wan with grief and anxiety .
You are paying no attention to his unbearable sorrow . Why this
unconcern?”
Dhritarashtra who doted on his son embraced Duryodhana and said: “I do
not see why you should be disconsolate. What is here that you already do
not enjoy? The whole world is at your feet. When you are surrounded by all
kinds of pleasures like the very gods, why should you pine in sorrow? You
have learnt the Vedas, archery , and other sciences from the best of masters.
As my tirst born, you have inherited the throne. What is left you to wish
for? T ell me.”
Duryodhana replied: “Father , like anybody else, rich or poor, I eat and
cover my nakedness, but I find life unbearable. What is the use of leading
such a life?” And then he revea led in detail the envy and hatred that were
eating into his vitals and depriving life of its savour . He referred to the
prosperity he had seen in the capital of the Pandavas which to him was
bitterer than loss of his all would have been. He burst out: “Contentment
with one‘s lot is not characteris tic of a kshatriya. Fear and pity lower the
dignity of kings . My wealth and pleasures do not give me any satisfaction
since I have witnessed the greater prosperity of Yudhishthira. O king, the
Pandavas have grown, while we have shrunk.”
Dhritarashtra said: “Beloved child, you are the eldest son of my royal
spouse and me and heir to the glory and greatness of our renown ed race. Do
not cherish any hatred towards the Pandavas. Sorrow and death  will be the
sole result of hatred of kith and kin especially when they are blameless. Tell
me why do you hate the guileless Yudhishthira? Is not his prosperity ours
too? Our friends are his friends. He has not the least jealousy or hatred
towards us. You are equal to him in heroism and ancestry . Why  should you
be jealo us of your brother? No. You should not be jealous.” Thus said the
old king who, though overfond of his son, did not occasionally hesitate to
say what he felt to be just.Duryodhana did not at all like the advice of his father , and his reply was not
very respectful.
He replied: “The man without commonsense but immersed in learning, is
like a wooden ladle immersed in savoury food which it neither tastes nor
benefits from. You have much learning of statecraft but have no state
wisdom at all as your advice to me clearly shows. The way of the world is
one thing and the administrati on of a state is quite another . Thus has
Brihaspati said: ‘Forbearance and contentment, though the duties of
ordinary men, are not virtues in kings. The kshatriya’ s duty is a constant
seeking of victory .” Duryodhana spoke thus quoting maxims of politics and
citing examples and making the worse appear the better reason.
Then Sakuni intervened and set forth in detail his infallible plan of inviting
Yudhishthira to play the game of dice, defeating him utterly and divesting
him of his all without recourse to arms.
The wicked Sakuni wound up with saying: “It is enough if you merely send
for the son of Kunti to play the game of dice. Leave the rest to me.”
Duryodhana added: “Sakuni will win for me the riches of the Pandavas
without a fight, if you would only agree to invite Y udhishthira.”
Dhritarashtra said: “Your sugg estion does not seem proper . Let us ask
Vidura about it. He will advise us rightly .”
But Duryodhana would not hear of consulting Vidura. He said to his father:
“Vidura will only give us the platitudes of ordinary morality , which will not
help us to our object. The policy of kings must be very different from the
goody maxims of text-books, and is sterner stuff of which the test is
success. Moreov er, Vidura does not like me and is partial to the Pandavas.
You know this as well as I do.”
Dhritarashtra said: “The Pandavas are strong. I do not think it wise to
antagonize them. The game of dice will only lead to enmity . The passions
resulting from the game will know no bounds. W e should not do it."
But Duryodhana  was importunate: “Wise statesmanship lies in casting off
all fear and prote cting oneself by one’s own efforts. Should we not force the
issue while yet we are more powerful than they? That will be real foresight.A lost opportun ity may never come again, and it is not as though we
invented the game of dice to injure the Pandavas. It is an ancient pastime
which kshatriyas  have always indulged in, and if it will now serve us to win
our cause without bloodshed, where is the harm?”
Dhritarashtra replied: “Dear son, I have grown old. Do as you like. But the
line that you are taking does not appeal to me. I am sure you will repent
later. This is the work of destiny .”
In the end, out-argued and through sheer fatigue and hopelessness of
dissuading his son, Dhritarash tra assented, and ordered the servants to
prepare a hall of games. Y et he could not forbear consulting V idura in secret
about the matter .
Vidura said: “O king, this will undoubtedly bring about the ruin of our race
by raising up unquenchable hate."
Dhritarashtra, who could not oppose the demand of his son, said: “If fortune
favours us I have no fear regarding this game. If, on the contrary fortune
goes against us, how could we help it? For, destiny is all-powerful. Go and
invite Y udhishthira on my behalf to come and play dice.” Thus commanded,
Vidura went to Y udhishthira with an invitation.
The weak-witted Dhritarashtra, over-persuaded, yielded to the desire of his
son through his attachment to him in spite of the fact that he knew this was
the way that destiny was working itself out.CHAPTER XXIV: THE WAGER
AT THE sight of Vidura, Yudhis hthira anxiously inquired: “Why  are you so
cheerless? Is it well with all our relations in Hastinapura? Are the king and
the princes well?”
Vidura acquaint ed him with his mission: “Everyone in Hastinapura is well.
How fares it with you all? I have come to invite you on behalf of King
Dhritarashtra to come and see the newly erected hall of games. A beautiful
hall has been erected there even like yours. The king would like you to
come with your brothers, see everything, have a game of dice and return to
your capital."
Yudhishthira seemed to ask counsel of Vidura: “Wagering games create
quarrels among kshatriyas. A wise man will avoid them if he can. We are
ever abiding by your advice. What would you have us do?”
Vidura replied: “Everyone is aware that the playing of dice is the root of
many evils. I did my best to oppose this idea. Still the king has commanded
me to invite you and I have come. Y ou may do as you like.”
Despite this warning, Yudhishthira went to Hastinapura with his brothers
and retinue.
It may be asked  why the wise Yudhishthira responded to the invitation.
Three reasons may be given. Men rush consciously on their ruin impelled
by lust, gambling and drink. Yudhishthira was fond of gambling. The
kshatriya traditio n made it a matter of etiquette and honour not to refuse an
invitation to a game of dice. There is a third reason too. True to the vow he
took at the time Vyasa had warned him of the quarrels that would arise
leading to destruction of the race. Yudhishthira would not give any occasion
for displeasure or complaint by refusing the invitation of Dhritarashtta.
These causes conspired with his natural inclination to make Yudhishthira
accept the invitation and go to Hastinapura. The Pandavas and their retinue
stopped in the magnificent palace reserved for them, Yudhishthira rested on
the day of arriv al, and after the daily routine of duties, went to the hall of
games next morning.After the exchange of customary greetings, Sakuni announced to
Yudhishthira that the cloth for playing the game had been spread and
invited him to it.
Yudhishthira at first said: “O king, gambling is bad. It is not through
heroism or merit that one succe eds in a game of chance. Asita, Devala and
other wise rishis  who were well versed in worldly affairs have declared that
gambling should  be avoided since it offers scope for deceit. They have also
said that conquest in battle is the proper path for the kshatrlyas. You are not
unaware of it.”
But a part of himself, weakened by addiction to gambling, was at war with
his judgment and in his heart of hearts Yudhishthira desired to play. In his
discussion with Sakuni, we see this inner conflict. The keen-witted Sakuni
spotted this weakness at once and said: “What is wrong with the game?
What, in fact is a battle? What is even a discussion between Vedic scholars?
The learned man wins victory over the ignorant. The better man wins in
every case. It is just a test of strength or skill, that is all, and there is nothing
wrong in it. As for the result, in every field of activity , the exper t defeats the
tyro, and that is what happens in a game of dice also. But if you are afraid,
you need not play but do not come out with this worn excuse of right and
wrong.”
Yudhishthira replied: “W ell, who is to play with me?”
Duryodhana said: “Mine is the responsibility for finding the stakes in the
form of wealth and gems to play the game. My uncle Sakuni will actually
cast the dice in my stead.”
Yudhishthira had thought himself secure of defeating Duryodhana in play
but Sakuni was a dif ferent matter , for Sakuni was a recognised expert. So he
hesitated and said: "It is not, I think, customary for one man to play on
behalf of another .”
Sakuni retorted tauntingly: “I see that you are for ging another excuse."
Yudhishthira flushed and, casting caution to the winds, replied: “W ell, I
shall play .”The hall was fully crowded . Drona, Kripa, Bhishma, Vidura and
Dhritarashtra were seated there. They knew that the game would end
viciously and sat unhappily witnessing what they could not prevent. The
assembled princes watched the game with great interest and enthusiasm.
At first they wagered jewels and later gold, silver and then chariots and
horses. Yudhish thira lost continually . When he lost all these, Yudhishthira
staked his servan ts and lost them  also. He pledged his elephants  and armies
and lost them too. The dice thrown by Sakuni seemed at every time to obey
his will.
Cows, sheep, cities, villages and citizens and all other possessions were lost
by Yudhishthira. Still, drugged with misfortune, he would not stop. He lost
the ornaments of his brothers and himself as well as the very clothes they
wore. Still ill-lu ck dogged him, or rather the trickery of Sakuni was too
much for him.
Sakuni asked: “Is there anything else that you can of fer as wager?”
Yudhishthira said: “Here is the beautiful sky-complexioned Nakula. He is
one of my riches. I place him as a wager .”
Sakuni replied: “Is it so? We shall be glad to win your belov ed prince.”
With these words Sakuni cast the dice and the result was what he had
foretold.
The assembly trembled.
Yudhishthira said: “Here is my brother Sahadeva. He is famous for his
infinite knowled ge in all the arts. It is wrong to bet him, still I do so. Let us
play.”
Sakuni cast the dice with the words: “Here, I have played and I have won."
Yudhishthira lost Sahadeva too.
The wicked Sakuni was afraid that Yudhishthira might stop there. So he
lashed Y udhishthira with these words:
“To you, Bhima  and Arjuna, being your full brothers, are no doubt dearer
than the sons of Madri. Y ou will not of fer them. I know ."Yudhishthira, now thoroughly reckless and stung to the quick by the
sneering imputa tion that he held his step-brothers cheap, replied: “Fool, do
you seek to divide us? How can you, living an evil life, understand the
righteous life we lead?”
He continued: “I of fer as wager the ever -victorious Arjuna who successfully
voyages across oceans of battle. Let us play .”
Sakuni answered : “I cast the dice" and he played. Yudhishthira lost Arjuna
also.
The stubborn madness of unbroken misfortune carried Yudhishthira further
and deeper . With tears in his eyes, he said: “O king, Bhima, my brother , is
our leader in battle; he strikes terror into the heart of demons and is equal to
Indra; he can never suffer the least dishonour and he is peerless  throughout
the world in physical strength. I offer him as a bet” and he playe d again and
lost Bhjma too.
The wicked Sakuni asked: “Is there anything else you can of fer?"
Dharmaputra replied: “Yes. Here is myself. If you win, I shall be your
slave.”
“Look. I win.” Thus saying, Sakuni cast the dice and won. After that Sakuni
stood up in the assembly and shouted the names of each of the five
Pandavas and loudly proclaimed that they had all become his lawful slaves,
The assembly looked on in stunned silence. Sakuni alone  turned to
Yudhishthira and said: “There is one jewel still in your possession by
staking which you can yet free yourself. Can you not continue the game
offering your wife Draupadi as wager?”
Yudhishthira despairingly said: “I pledge her ,” and he trembled unwittingly .
-
There was audible distress and agitation in that part of the assembly where
the elders sat. Soon great shouts of ‘Fie! Fie!’ arose from all sides. The
more emotional wept. Others perspired, and felt the end of the world was
come.Duryodhana, his brothers and Karna shouted with exultation. In that group
Yuyutsu alone bent his head in shame and sorrow and heaved a deep sigh.
Sakuni cast the dice and shouted again: “I have won.”
At once Duryodhana turned to V idura and said: “Go and fetch Draupadi, the
beloved wife of the Pandavas. She must hence forward sweep and clean our
house. Let her come without delay .”
Vidura exclaimed: “Are you mad that you rush to certain destruction? You
are hanging by a slender thread over a bottomless abyss! Drunk with
success, you do not see it, but it will engulf you!" Having thus reprimanded
Duryodhana, Vidura turned to the assembly and said: “Yudhishthira had no
right to stake Panchali as by then he had himself already lost his freedom
and lost all rights. I see that the ruin of the Kauravas is imminent, and that
regardless of the advice of their friends and well-wishers, the sons of
Dhritarashtra are on the path to hell.”
Duryodhana was angry at these words of Vidura and told Prathikami, his
charioteer: “Vidura is jealous of us and he is afraid of the Pandavas. But
you are dif ferent. Go forth and bring Draupadi immediately .”CHAPTER XXV: DRAUPADI’S GRIEF
PRATHIKAMI went to Draupadi as ordered by his master . He said to her:
“O revered princess, Yudhishth ira fell under the spell of the game of dice
and has wagered and lost even you. Now you belong to Duryod hana. I have
come by Duryodhana’ s command to take you to serve in his household as
maid-servant, which will hereafter be your oflice.”
Draupadi, the spouse of the emperor who had performed Rajasuya, was
dumbfounded, at this strange message. She asked: “Prathikami, what do
you say? Which prince would pledge his wife? Had he nothing else to
pawn?"
Prathikami answered: “It is because he had already lost all other
possessions and had nothing else left that he played offerin g you as a
stake.” Then he told her the whole story of how Yudhishthira had lost all his
wealth and had finally betted her, after having first forfeited his brothers
and himself.
Though the news was such as to break the heart and kill the soul, still,
Draupadi soon regained her fortitude and, with anger blazing from her eyes,
said: “O charioteer , return. Ask of him who played the game whether in it
he first lost himself, or his wife. Ask this question in the open assembly;
bring me his answer and then you can take me.”
Prathikami went to the assembly and, turning to Yudhishthira, asked of him
the question put by Draupadi.
Yudhishthira remained speechless.
Then Duryodhan a bade Prathikami bring Panchali herself there to question
her husband.
Prathikami went again to Draupadi and humbly said: “Princess, the mean-
minded Duryod hana desires you to go to the assembly and ask your
question yourself.” '
Draupadi answe red, “No. Return to the assembly and put the question and
demand an answer .”Prathikami did so.
Enraged, Duryodhana turned to his brother Duhsasana and said: “This man
is a fool and is afraid of Bhima. Go and fetch Draupadi even if you have to
drag her here.”
Thus commanded, the wicked Duhsasana at once sped with joy on his
errand. He proceeded to the place where Draupadi was, shouting: “Come,
why do you delay? You are now ours. Be not shy, beautiful lady. Make
yourself agreeab le to us, now that you have been won by us. Come to the
assembly” and in his impatience, he bade as though to take her thither by
force.
Panchali rose trembling, heart-stricken with sorrow and started to fly for
refuge to the inner apartments of Dhritarashtra’ s queen. Duhsasana darted
after her , caught her by the hair and dragged her to the assembly .
It is with a shudder of repugnance that we relate how the sons of
Dhritarashtra stooped to commit this vilest of deeds.
As soon as she came to the assembly , Draupadi controlled her anguish and
appealed to the elders gathered there:
“How could you consent to my being staked "by the king who was himself
trapped into the game and cheated by wicked persons, expert  in the art?
Since he was no longer a free man, how could he stake anyth ing at all?”
Then, stretching  out her arms and raising her flowing eyes in agonised
supplication she cried in a voice broken with sobs:
“If you have loved and revered the mothers who bore you and gave you
suck, if the honour of wife or sister or daughter has been dear to you, if you
believe in God and dharma, forsake me not in this horror more cruel than
death! "
At this heart-broken cry-as of a poor fawn stricken to death-the elders hung
their heads in grief and shame. Bhima could hold himself no longer . His
swelling heart found relief in a roar of wrath which shook the very walls,
and turning to Y udhishthira he said bitterly:
“Even abandoned professional gamblers would not stake the harlots who
live with them, and you, worse than they, have left the daughter of Drupadato the mercy of these ruffians. I cannot hear this injustice. You are the cause
of this great crime. Brother Sahadeva, bring fire. I am going to set fire to
those hands of his which cast the dice."
Arjuna however remonstrated gently with Bhima: “You have never before
spoken thus. The plot devised by our enemies is entangling us also in its
meshes and inciting us to wicked action. We should not succumb and play
their game. Beware."
With a superhuman ef fort, Bhima controlled his anger .‘
Vikarna, the son of Dhtitarashtr a could not bear the sight of the agony of
Panchali. He rose up and said: “O kshatriya heroes, why are you silent? I
am a mere youth, I know , but your silence compels me to speak. Listen.
Yudhishthira was enticed to this game by a deeply plotted invitation and he
pledged this lady when he had no right to do so, because she does not
belong to Yudhishthira alone. For that reason alone the wager is illegal.
Besides, Yudhishthira had already lost his freedom, and being no longer a
free man, how could he have a right to offer her as a stake‘? And there is
this further objection. It was Sakuni who suggested her as a pledge, which
is agains t the rules of the game,  under which neither player may demand a
specific bet. If we consider all these points, we must admit that Panchaii has
not been legally won by us. This is my opinion.”
When the young Vikarna spoke thus courageously , the wisdom given by
God to the members of the assembly suddenly illumined their minds. There
were great shouts of applause. They shouted; “Dharma has been saved.
Dharma has been saved."
At that moment Karna rose up and said:
“O Vikarna, forgetting that there are elders in this assembly , you lay down
the law though you are but a stripling. By your ignorance and rashness you
are injuring the very family which gave you birth, just as the flame
generated by the arani destroys its source, the stick. It is an ill bird that fouls
its own nest. At the very beginning, when Yudhishthira was a free man, he
forfeited all he possessed and that, of course, included Draupadi. Hence,
Draupadi had already come into Sakuni’ s possession. There is nothing more
to be said in the matter . Even the clothes they have on are now Sakuni’ sproperty . O Duhsasana, seize the garments of the Pandavas and the robes of
Draupadi and hand them over to Sakuni."
As soon as they heard the cruel words of Karna, the Pandavas, feeling that
they had to stand the test of dharma to the bitter end, flung off their upper
garments to show that they were ready to follow the path of honour and
right at any cost.
Seeing this, Duhsasana went to Draupadi and made ready to seize her
clothes by force. All earthly aid had failed, and in the anguish of utter
helplessness, she implored divine mercy and succour: “O Lord of the
World,” she wailed, “God whom I adore and trust abandon me not in this
dire plight. You are my sole refuge. Protect me.” And she fainted away .
Then, as the wicked Duhsasana started his shameful work of pulling at
Panchali’ s robes, and good men shuddered and averted their eyes, even
then, in the mercy of God a miracle occurred. In vain Duhsasana toiled to
strip off her garments, for as he pulled off each, ever fresh garments were
seen to clothe her body , and soon a great heap of resplendent clothes was
piled up before the assembly till Duhsasana desisted and sat down in sheer
fatigue. The assembly trembled  at this marvel and good men praised God
and wept.
Bhima with quivering lips, loudly uttered this terrible oath: “May I never go
to the blest abode of my ancestors if I do not rend the breast and drink the
heart's blood of this sinful Duhsasana, this shame of the Bharata race.”
Suddenly , the howling of jackals could be heard. Donkeys and carnivorous
birds began to send forth weird  dissonant cries from all sides,  portending
calamities to come.
Dhritarashtra who realised that this incident would be the cause of the
destruction of his race for once, acted with wisdom and courage. He called
Draupadi to his side and attempted to soothe her with words of gentleness
and affection. Then he turned to Yudhlshthira and said: “You are so
blameless that you can have no enemies. Forgive in your magn animity the
evil done by Duryodhana and dismiss all memory of it from your mind.
Take back your kingdom and riches and everything else and be free and
prosperous. Return to Indraprastha.” And the Pandavas left that accursedhall, bewildered  and stunned, and seeing a miracle in this sudden release
from calamity . But it was too good to endure.
After Y udhishthira and his brothers had departed there was a long and angry
discussion in the palace of the Kauravas incited by Duhsasana,  Sakuni and
others, Duryodhana upbraided his father with having frustrated their well-
laid plans on the very thresh old of success. He quoted Brihaspati’ s
aphorism that no device could be considered wrong which had as its object
the destruction of formidable enemies. He dilated on the prowess of the
Pandavas and expressed his conviction that the only hope of overcoming
the Pandavas lay in guile and taking advantage of their pride and sense of
honour . No self-respecting kshatriya could decline an invitation to a game
of dice.  Duryodhana secured his doting father ’s reluctant and bodeful
approval to a plan to entice Y udhishthira once again to a game of dice.
A messe nger was accordingly despatched after Yudhisthira who had taken
his departure for Indraprastha. He came up with Yudhishthira  before the
latter had reached his destination and invited him on behalf of king
Dhritarashtra to come back. On hearing this invitation, Yudhishthira said:
“Good and evil come from destiny and cannot be avoided. If we must play
again -we must, that is all. A challenge to dice cannot in honour be refused.
I must accept it.” Truly, as Sri Vyasa says: “There never was and never can
be an antelope of gold! Yet, Ram a went in vain pursuit of what seemed one;
surely , when calamities are imminent, the judgment is first destroyed.”
Dharmaputra returned to Hastin apura and set again for a game with Sakuni,
though everyone in the assembly tried to dissuade him. He seemed a mere
pawn moved by Kali to relieve  the burden of the world. The stake played
for was that the defeated party should go with his brothers into exile to the
forest and remain there for twelve years and spend the thirteenth year
incognito; if they were recognised in the thirteenth year, they should go
again into exile for twelve years. Needless to say, Yudhishthi ra met with
defeat on this occasion also, and the Pandavas took the vows of those who
are to go to the forest. All the members of the assembly bent down their
heads in shame.CHAPTER XXVI: DHRITARASHTRA’S
ANXIETY
WHEN the Pandavas set out for the forest, there arose a great clamour of
lamentation from people who thronged the streets and climbed the roofs and
towers and trees  to see them go. The princes, who, of yore, rode in jewelled
chariots or on lordly elephants to strains of auspicious music, now walked
away from their birthright on weary feet, accompanied by weeping crowds.
On all sides cries arose of “Fie and Alas! Does not God see this from His
heaven?”
The blind Dhritarashtra sent for Vidura and asked him to describe the
departure of the Pandavas into exile.
Vidura replied: “Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, went with his face covered
with a cloth. Bhima went behind with his eyes lowered on his arms. Arjuna
proceeded scattering sand on his path. Nakula and Sahadeva besmeared
their bodies with dust and closely followed Yudhishthira. Draupadi
accompanied Dharmaputra, her dishevelled hair covering her face and her
eyes streaming with tears. Dhaumya, the priest, went along with them
singing the Sama hymns, addressed to Y ama, the Lord of Death."
When he heard these words, Dhritarashtra was filled with ever greater fear
and anxiety than before. He asked: “What do the citizens say?”
Vidura answered: “O great king, I shall tell you in their own words what the
citizens of all castes and creeds say: ‘Our leaders have left us. Fie on the
elders of the Kuru race who have suffered such things to happen! The
covetous Dhrita rashtra and his sons have driven away the sons of Pandu to
the forest.’ While the citizens blame us thus, the heavens are vexed with
cloudless lightning, and the distressed earthquakes, and there are other evil
portents.”
While Dhritarashtra and Vidura were conversing thus, the sage Narada
suddenly appear ed before them and declared: “Fourteen years from this day
the Kauravas will become extinct as the result of the crime committed by
Duryodhana” and vanished from sight.Duryodhana and his companio ns were filled with fear and approached
Drona with a prayer never to abandon them, whatever happened.
Drona answered gravely: “I believe with the wise that the Pandavas are of
divine birth and unconquerable ; yet my duty is to fight for the sons of
Dhritarashtra who rely on me and whose salt I eat. I shall strive for them,
heart and soul, but destiny is all-powerful. The Pandavas will surely return
from exile, burning with anger . I should know what anger is, for I dethroned
and dishonoured Drupada on account of my anger towards him. Implacably
revengeful, he has performed a sacrifice so that he might be blessed with a
son who would kill me and it is said Dhrishtadyumna is that son. As destiny
would have it, he is the brother -in-law and fast friend of the Pandavas, and
things are movin g as foreordained. Your actions tend in the same direction
and your days are numbered. Lose no time in doing good while you may;
perform great sacrifice, enjoy sinless pleasures, give alms to the needy .
Nemesis will overtake you in the fourteenth year. Duryodhana, make peace
with Yudhishthira - this is my counsel to you but, of course, you will do
what you Iike."
Duryodhana was not at all pleased with these words of Drona.
Sanjaya asked Dhritarashtra: “O king, why are you worried?”
The blind king replied: “How can I know peace after having injured the
Pandavas?”
Sanjaya said: “What you say is quite true. The victim of adverse fate will
first become perverted, utterly losing his sense of right and wrong. Time,
the all destroyer , does not take a club and break the head of a man but by
destroying his judgment, makes him act madly to his own ruin. Your sons
have grossly insulted Pancha li and put themselves on the path of
destruction.”
Dhritarashtra said: “I did not follow the wise path of dharma and
statesmanship but suffered myself to be misled by my foolish son and, as
you say , we are fast hastening towards the abyss."
Vidura used to advise Dhritarashtra earnestly . He would often tell him:
“Your son has committed a great wrong. Dharmaputra has been cheated.
Was it not your duty to turn your children to the path of virtue and pull themaway from vice? You should order even now that the Pandavas get back the
kingdom granted to them by you. Recall Yudhishthira from the forest and
make peace with him. You should even restrain Duryodhana by force if he
will not listen to reason.”
At first Dhritarashtra would listen in sad silence when Vidura spoke thus,
for he knew Vidura to be a wiser man than himself who wishe d him well,
but gradually his patience wore thin with repeated homilies.
One day, Dhrita rashtra could stand it no longer . "O Vidura,” he burst out,
“you are always speaking for the Pandavas and against my sons.  You do not
seek our good. Duryodhana was born of my loins. How can I give him up?
What is the use of advising such an unnatural course? I have lost my faith in
you and do not need you any more. You are free to go to the Pandavas if
you like.” Then, turning his back on Vidura, he retired to the inner
apartments.
Vidura sorrowfully felt that the destruction of the Kuru race was certain
and, taking Dhritarashtra at his word, drove in a chariot with fleet horses to
the forest where the Pandavas lived.
Dhritarashtra was filled with anxious remorse. He reflected within himself:
“What have I done? I have only strengthened the Pandavas still further by
driving the wise Vidura into their arms.” Pondering thus, he sent for
Sanjaya and asked him to bear a repentant message to V idura imploring him
to for give the thoughtless words of an unhappy father and to return.
Sanjaya hurried to the hermitage where the Pandavas were starving and
found them clad in deer-skin and surrounded by sages. He also saw Vidura
there and conveyed Dhritarashtra’ s message adding that the blind king
would die broken-hearted if he did not return.
The soft-hearted  Vidura, who was dharma incarnate, was greatly moved and
returned to Hastinapura.
Dhritarashtra embraced Vidura and the difference between them was
washed away in tears of mutual af fection.
One day, the sage Maitreya came to the court of Dhritarashtra and was
welcomed with great respect.Dhritarashrra craved his blessin g and asked him: “Revered sir, you have
certainly met my beloved children, the Pandavas, in Kurujangala. Are they
well? W ill mutual af fection abide in our family without any diminution?"
Maitreya said: “I accidentally met Yudhishthira in the Kamyaka forest. The
sages of the place had come to see him. I learnt of the events that took place
in Hastin apura, and I marvelled that such things should have been permitted
while Bhishma and yourself were alive.”
Later , Maitreya saw Duryodhan a who was also in the court and advised
him, for his own good, not to injure but to make peace with the Pandavas
who were not only mighty themselves but related to Krishna and Drupada.
The obstinate and foolish Duryodhana merely laughed, slappin g his thighs
in derisi on and, tearing the ground with his feet and without deigning an
answer , turned away .
Maitreya grew angry and lookin g at Duryodhana said: “Are you so arrogant
and do you slap your thighs in derision of one who wishes you well! Your
thighs will be broken by Bhima’ s mace and you will die on the battlefield.”
At this Dhritarashtra jumped up, fell at the feet of the sage and begged
forgiveness.
Maitreya said: “My curse will not work if your son makes peace with the
Pandavas. Other wise it will have effect,” and strode indignantly out of the
assembly .
The Mahabharata is an ancient story but human nature remains the same.
Even at the present day, anger and hatred afflict and threaten with ruin poor
human beings without regard to age or sex or condition. If we read this
chapter and ponder on it when we are inclined to be angry , it may make us
wise and save us from foolishness and crime.CHAPTER XXVII: KRlSHNA’S VOW
AS SOO N as the news of the slaying of Sisupala by Krishna reached his
friend Salva, he became very angry and besieged Dwaraka with a mighty
force. Krishna having not yet returned to Dwaraka, old Ugras ena was in
charge of the defence of the city. The sieges described in the Mahabharata
seem very much like those in wars of the present day. Dwaraka was a
strongly garrisoned fortress built on an island and well provided  with means
of defence. Ample barracks had been provided and there was an abundant
supply of food and weapons and the garrison included many illustrious
warriors. Ugrasena im- posed a stringent ban upon drinking and
amusements generally for the period of the siege. All the bridges were
demolished and ships were forbidden entry into ports in the realm. Iron
spikes were planted in the moats around the fortress and the city walls kept
in good repair . All entrances to the city were guarded with barbed wire and
ingress and egress were strictly controlled by permits and passwords. Thus
no arran gements were neglected  that could further strengthen the city which
nature had already made impregnable. The pay of the soldiers was
increased. Volunteers for service were rigidly tested before being accepted
as soldiers.
The siege was so rigorously pushed that the garrison suffered great
privations. Krishna, when he returned, was struck to the heart at the
sufferings of his beloved city and he compelled Salva immedia tely to raise
the siege, by attacking and defeating him. It was only afterwards that
Krishna learnt for the first time of the events at Hastinapura, the game of
dice and the exile of the Pandav as. At once he set out for the forest where
the Pandavas were living.
Along with Krishna went many , including men of the Bhoja and Vrishni
tribes, Dhrishtaketu, the king of the Chedi country , and the Kekayas who
were all devoted to the Pandavas.
They were filled with righteous indignation when they heard of
Duryodhana’ s perfidy and cried out that surely the earth would drink the
blood of such wicked people. Draupadi approached Sri Krishna and, in a
voice drowned in tears and broken with sobs, told the story of her wrongs.She said: “I was dragged to the assembly when I had but a single garment
on my body . The sons of Dhrita rashtra insulted me most outrageously and
gloated over my agony . They thought that I had become their slave and
accosted me and treated me as one. Even Bhishma and Dhritarashtra forgot
my birth and breeding and my relationship to them. O Janardhana, even my
husbands did not protect me from the jeers and the ribald insults of those
foul ruflians. Bhima's bodily strength and Arjuna’ s Gandiva were alike of
no avail. Under such supreme provocation even weaklings would have
found strength and courage to strike the vile insulter dead. The Pandavas
are renowned heroes and yet Duryodhana lives! I, the daughter -in-law of
the emperor Pandu, was dragged by my hair. I the wife of five heroes, was
dishonoured. O Madhusudana even you had deserted me." She stood
trembling utterly unable to continue, for the grief convulsed her .
Krishna was deeply moved and he consoled the weeping Draupa di. He said:
“Those who torm ented you will be stricken to death in the blood y quagmire
of a lost battle. Wipe your eyes. I solemnly promise that your grievous
wrongs shall be amply avenged. I shall help the Pandavas in every way . You
will become an empress. The heavens may fall, the Himalayas may split in
twain, the earth may crumble or the boundless sea may dry up—but. I tell
you verily , my words shall stand. I swear this,” and Krishna took a solemn
vow before Draupadi. This vow, it will be seen, was in perfect accord with
the purpose of the Lord's avatars as declared in scriptures: “For protecting
the righteous, for destroying the wicked and for firmly upholding the law, I
am born on earth age after age.”
Dhrishtadyumna also consoled his sister and told her how nemesis would
overtake the Kauravas. He said: “I will kill Drona. Sikhandin will cause
Bhishma‘s fall. Bhima will take the lives of the wicked Duryodhana and his
brothers. Arjuna will slay Karna, the charioteer ’s son."
Sri Krishna said: “When this calamity befell you. I was not in Dwaraka.
Had I been there, I would never  have allowed this fraudulent game of dice
to take place. Uninvited, I would have gone there and stirred up Drona,
Kripa and the other elders to a sense of duty. I would, at all costs, have
prevented this destructive play of dice. When Sakuni was cheating you, I
was fighting King Salva who had besieged my city. It was only after I haddefeated him that I came to know of the game of dice and the subsequent
sordid story. It grieves me that I am not able to remove your sorrows
immediately but you know , some water must be lost before a broken dam is
restored.”
Then Krishna took leave and returned to Dwaraka with Subhad ra, the wife
of Arjuna, and their child, Abhimanyu. Dhrlshtadyumna went back to
Panchala taking with him the sons of Draupadi.CHAPTER XXVIII: PASUPATA
IN the beginnin g of their stay in the forest, Bhima and Draupadi used, on
occasions, to argue with Yudhish thira. They would plead that only righteous
anger befitted a kshatriya and that patience and forbearance under slights
and insults were not worthy of him. They would quote weighty  authorities
and argue vehemently in support of their contention. Yudhishthira would
firmly reply that they should abide by the promise they had made and that
forbearance was the highest virtue of all. Bhima was burning with
impatience to attack and kill Duryodhana immediately and win back the
kingdom. He thought it unworth y of warriors to continue to dwell tamely in
the forest.
Bhima said to Yudhishthira: “You speak like those who repeat Vedic
mantras and are satisfied with the sound of the words though ignorant of
their meaning. Your intellect has become confused. You are born as a
kshatriya and yet you do not think or behave like one. You have become a
brahmana by temperament. You know , the scriptures enjoin on a kshatriya
sternness and enterprise. We should not let the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra
have their way. Vain is the birth of a kshatriya who does not conquer his
deceitful enemie s. This is my opinion, and to me, if we go to hell by killing
a deceitful foe, such hell is heaven. Your forbearance burns us worse than
fire. It scorches  Arjuna and myself day and night, making us sleepless.
Those miscreants have seized our kingdom by fraud and are enjoying it,
while you lie torpid like a gorged python. You say that we should abide by
our promise. How can the world -renowned Arjuna live incogni to? Can the
Himalayas be hidden under a handful of grass? How can the lion-hearted
Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva live in hiding? Can the famous Draupadi
walk about unrecognised by others? Even if we do these impossible things,
the son of Dhrita rashtra will find out through his spies. Hence, this promise
of ours is impossible of perfor mance and has been put on us merely to
thrust us out again for another thirteen years. The sastras too support me
when I say that a filched promis e is no promise. A handful of grass thrown
to a tired bull ought to be enoug h as expiation for breaking such a promise.
You should resolve to kill our enemies immediately . There is no higher duty
for a kshatriya.”Bhima was neve r tired of press ing his view . Draupadi also would refer to
the dishonour she had suffered  at the hands of Duryodhana, Karna and
Duhsasana and would quote authorities from the scriptures that would give
Yudhishthira anxiety to think.  He would sometimes answer with trite
maxims of politics and refer to the relative strength of the parties.
He would say: “Our enemy has such adherents as Bhurisravas, Bhishma,
Drona, Karna and Aswatthama.  Duryodhana and his brothers are expert in
warfare. Many feudatory prince s, as well as mighty monarchs, are now on
their side. Bhishma and Drona, indeed, have no respect for Duryodhana’ s
character , but will not give him up and are prepared to sacrifice their lives
on his side in the battlefield. Karna is a brave and skilful fighter , well
versed in the use of all the weapons. The course of war is unpre dictable and
success is uncertain. There is no use in being hasty .” Thus Yudhishthira
managed with dif ficulty to restrain the impatience of the younger Pandavas.
Later as advised by Vyasa, Arjuna went to the Himalayas to practise
austerities for the purpose of getting new weapons from the devas. Arjuna
took leave of his brothers and went to Panchali to bid her farewell. She said:
“O Dhananjaya, may you prosper in your mission. May God give you all
that Kuntidevi hoped and wished for when you were born. The happiness,
life, honour and prosperity of us all depend on you. Return after acquiring
new weapons.” Thus Panchali sent him forth with auspicious words.
It is noteworthy that though the voice was Draupadi the wife’ s, yet the
benediction was Kunti the moth er’s for the words were: “May God give all
that Kuntidevi wished and hoped for when you were born.”
Arjuna passed through dense forests and reached the mountain of Indrakila,
where he met an old brahmana. The ascetic smiled and spoke affectionately
to Arjuna: “Child, you are clad in armour and carry weapons. Who are you?
Weapons are of no use here. What do you seek in this garb of a kshatriya in
this abode of ascetics and saints who have conquered anger and passion?”
That was Indra, the king of gods , who came to have the pleasure of meeting
his son.
Arjuna bowed to his father and said: “I seek arms; bless me with weapons.”Indra replied: “O Dhananjaya, what is the use of weapons ‘? Ask for
pleasures or seek to go to higher worlds for enjoyment,"
Arjuna answered: “O king of gods, I do not seek pleasures of higher worlds.
l have come here after leaving Panchali and my brothers in the forest. I seek
but weapons.”
The thousand-eyed said: “If you be blessed by the vision of god Siva, the
three-eyed god, and obtain his grace, you will receive divine weapons. Do
penance unto Siva.” Thus sayin g Indra disappeared. Then, Arjuna went to
the Himalayas and did penance to obtain the grace of Siva.
Siva under the guise of a hunter and accompanied by his divine spouse
Umadevi, entere d the forest in pursuit of game. The chase grew fast and
furious, and presently a wild boar started charging Arjuna, who shot an
arrow into it with his Gandiva  at the same moment that the hunter Siva
transfixed it with a shaft from Pinaka, his bow .
Arjuna shouted in loud voice: “Who are you? Why are you ranging in this
forest with your wife? How dare you shoot at the game I had aimed at?”
The hunter replied as though in contempt: “This forest full of game, belongs
to us who live in it. You do not look tough enough to be a forester: your
limbs and bearing bespeak a soft luxurious life. It is rather for me to ask
what you are doing here.” He also added that it was his shaft that had killed
the boar and that, if Arjuna thought differently , he was welcome to fight
about it.
Nothing could please Arjuna better. He jumped up and showere d snake-like
arrows at Siva. To his amazem ent, they seemed to have no effect on the
hunter and fell back hurtless like storm-driven rain from a mountain peak.
When he had no more arrows, he started to strike Siva with his bow, but the
hunter seemed not to heed it and wrenched with ease the bow out of
Arjuna’ s hand and burst into laughter . Arjuna, who had been disarmed with
humiliating ease by one who seemed an ordinary hunter of the forest, was
struck with amazement, almost amounting to doubt, but nothing daunted, he
drew his sword and continued  the combat. The sword was shivered to
pieces on the hunter ’s adamantine frame. There was now nothing to do but
to grapple with the formidable unknown; but here again he was outmatched.The hunter caught him in an iron clasp so close that Arjuna was quite
helpless.
Worsted and overmastered, Arjuna humbly sought divine aid and meditated
on Siva,  and as he did so, a light broke on his troubled mind, and at once he
knew who the hunter really was.
He fell at the feet of the Lord and, in a broken voice of repentance and
adoration, he prayed for forgiveness. “I forgive you," said Siva smilingly
and gave him back Gandiva, as well as the other weapons, of which he had
been deprived. He also besto wed on Arjuna the marvellous Pasupata
weapon.
Arjuna’ s body , battered in the unequal combat, was made whole  and perfect
by the divine touch of the three-eyed god and became a hundredfold
stronger and more brilliant than before. “Go to heaven and render dutiful
respect to your father Indra,” said Siva and vanished from View like the
setting son.
Arjuna was overcome with joy and exclaimed: “Have I really seen the Lord
face to face and have I been blessed with his divine touch? Wha t more do I
need?” At that moment, Matali, the charioteer of Indra, came there with his
chariot and took Arjuna to the kingdom of the gods.CHAPTER XXIX: AFFLICTION IS NOTHING
NEW
BALARAMA and Krishna came with their retinue to the abode of the
Pandavas in the forest. Deeply distressed by what he saw, Balarama said to
Krishna:
“O Krishna, it would seem that virtue and wickedness bear contrary fruit in
this life, for see, the wicked Duryodhana is ruling his kingdom clad in silk
and gold, while the virtuous Yudhishthira lives in the forest, wearing the
bark of trees. Seeing such unmerited prosperity and undeserve d privation,
men have lost their faith in God. The praise of virtue in the sastras seems
mere mummery  when we see the actual results of good and evil in this
world. How will Dhritarashtra justify his conduct and defend himself when
he is face to face with the god of death? Even the mountains and the earth
weep at the sight of the blamele ss Pandavas dwelling in the forests with the
blessed Draupadi, born from the sacrificial fire.”
Satyaki, who was seated near, said: “O Balarama, this is no time for
lamenting. Should we wait till Yudhishthira asks us to do our duty by the
Pandavas? Whil e you and Krishna and all other relations are living, why
should the Pand avas waste their precious years in the forest? Let us collect
our forces and attack Duryodha na. With the army of the Vrishnis, we are
surely strong enough to destroy the Kauravas. Why , where is the need to
foil Karna’s vaunted archery and cut off his head. Let us kill Duryodhana
and his adherents in the battlefield and hand over the kingdom to
Abhimanyu if the Pandavas wish to keep their word and stay in the forest.
This is good for them and befits us as men of valour .”
Vasudeva, who was listening carefully to this speech, said: “What you say
is true. But the Pandavas would  not like to receive from the hands of others
what they have not won by their own efforts. Draupadi for one, born of a
heroic race as she is, would not hear of it. Yudhishthira will never give up
the path of righteousness for love or fear. When the stipulated period of
exile is over the kings of Panch ala, Kekaya and Chedi and ourselves will
unite our forces to help the Pandavas to conquer their enemies.”Yudhishthira was delighted at these words of Krishna.
“Sri Krishna knows my mind,” said he. “Truth is greater than power or
prosperity and has to he guarded at all costs, and not the kingdom. When he
wants us to fight, he shall find us ready . The heroes of the Vrishni race may
now return with the certainty that we shall meet again when the time is
ripe.” W ith these words Y udhishthira gave them leave to return.
Arjuna was still away in the Himalayas and Bhima’ s anxiety and impatience
became well-nigh insupportable. He said to Y udhishthira:
“You know that our life depend s on Arjuna. He has been very long away ,
and we have had no tidings of him. If he should be lost to us then neither
the king of Panchala, nor Satya ki nor even Sri Krishna can save us, and I
for one cannot survive that loss. All this we owe to that mad game of dice-
our sorro ws and sufferings, as well as the growing strength of our foes. To
be dwelling in the forest is not the duty enjoined on a kshatriya . We should
immediately recall Arjuna and wage war with the sons of Dhritarashtra,
with the help of Sri Krishna. I shall be satisfied only when the wicked
Sakuni, Karna and Duryodhana are slain. After this clear duty is done, you
may, if you like, return to the forest and live a life of asceticism. It is not a
sin to kill by stratagem an enemy who has resorted to stratagem. I have
heard that the Atharvana Veda has incantations which can compress time
and reduce its span, if we could, by such means, squeeze thirteen  years into
thirteen days, we would be perfectly justified in doing so: and you will
permit me on the fourteenth day to kill Duryodhana.”
Hearing these words of Bhima, Dharmaputra affectionately embraced him
and sought to restrain his impetuosity . “Beloved brother , as soon as the
period of thirtee n years is over, Arjuna the hero, with the Gandiva, and
yourself will light and kill Duryodhana. Be patient till then. Duryodhana
and his followers, who are sunk in sin cannot escape. Be assured of it.”
While the sorrow-stricken brothers were thus engaged in debate, the great
sage Brihadaswa  came to the hermitage of the Pandavas and was received
with the customary honours. After a while, Y udhishthira said to him:
“Revered sage, our deceitful enemies drew us into this game of dice and
cheated us of our kingdom and riches and drove my heroic broth ers, as wellas Panch ali and myself to the forest. Arjuna, who left us a long time ago to
get divin e weapo ns, has not returned as yet and we miss him sorely . Will he
return with divine arms? And when will he he back? Surely , never was
there in this world a man who sullered so much sorrow as myself.”
The great sage replied: “Do not let your mind dwell on sorrow Arjuna will
return with divine weapons and you will conquer your enemies in the
fitness of time. You say that there is no one in this world who is as
unfortunate as you. Now , that is not true, though everyon e tried by
adversity , is inclined to claim pre-eminence in sorrow , because things felt
are more than things heard or seen. Have you heard of king Nala of
Nishadha? He suffered more sorrows than yourself even in the forest. He
was deceived by Pushkara at a game of dice; he lost his wealth and
kingdom and had to go in exile to the forest. Less fortunate than you, he had
not with him his brothers or brahmanas. The influence of Kali, the spirit of
the dark age, deprived him of his discrimination and good sense and, not
knowing what he was doing he deserted his wife who had accompanied
him, and wandered about in the forest, solitary and almost mad. Now ,
compare your state with his. You have the company of your heroic brothers
and devoted wife and are supp orted by a few learned brahma nas in your
adversity . Your mind is sound and steady . Self-pity is natural, but you are
really not so badly of f.”
The sage then narrated the life of Nala which constitutes twenty-eight
chapters of the great epic. The sage concluded with these words:
“O Pandava, Nala was tried by sorrows, more agonising than yours, yet he
triumphed over them all and his life ended happily . You have the
alleviations of unclouded intellect and the society of your nearest and
dearest. You spend much of your time in exalted contemplation of dharma
and in holy converse with brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas and
Vedantas. Bear your trials and tribulations with fortitude for they are the lot
of man and not peculiar to you.”
Thus did the sage Brihadaswa console Y udhishthira.CHAPTER XXX: AGASTYA
THE brahmanas, who had been with Yudhishthira in Indraprastha, had
followed him to the forest. It was difficult to maintain such a large
establishment. Some time after Arjuna had gone on his quest of Pasupata, a
brahmana sage named Lomasa  came to the abode of the Pandavas. He
advised Yudhishthira to minimis e his retinue before going on pilgrimage as
it would he difficult to move freely from place to place with a large
following. Yudhishthira, who had long felt that difficulty , announced to his
followers that such of them, as were unaccustomed to hardship and to hard
and scanty fare and those who had followed merely in token of loyalty ,
might return to Dhritarashtra or, if they preferred it, go to Drupada, the
King of Panchala.
Later , with a greatly reduced retinue, the Pandavas started on a pilgrimage
to holy places, acquainting themselves with the stories and traditions
relating to each. The story of Agastya was one such.
Agastya, it is said. once saw some ancestral spirits dangling head down and
asked them who they were and how they had come to be in that unpleasant
plight. They replied: “Dear child, we are your ancestors. If you dischar ge
not your debt to us by marrying and begetting progeny , there will be no one
after you to offer us oblations. We have, therefore, resorted to this austerity ,
in order to persuade you to save us from this peril."
When Agastya heard this, he decided to marry .
The king of the country of Vidarbha was childless and so careworn. He
repaired to Agastya to get his blessing. In granting him the boon, Agastya
announced that the king would be the father of a beautiful girl, who, he
stipulated, should be given in marriage to him.
Soon the queen gave birth to a girl who was named Lopamudr a. She grew
with years into a maiden of such rare beauty and charm that she became
celebrated in the kshatriya world; but no prince dared to woo her for fear of
Agastya.
Later , the sage Agastya came to Vidarbha and demanded the hand of the
king’ s daughter .The king was reluctant to give the delicately nurtured princess in marriage
to a sage leading  the primitive life of a forester but he also feare d the anger
of the sage if he said nay, and was plunged in sorrow . Lopamudra, greatly
concerned, discovered the cause of her parent’ s unhappiness and expressed
her readiness - nay her desire, to marry the sage.
The king was relieved, and the marriage of Agastya and Lopamudra was
celebrated in due course.
When the princess set out to accompany the sage, he bade her give up her
costly garments and valuable jewels. Unquestioningly Lopamudra
distributed her priceless jewels and garments amongst her companions and
attendants, and covering herse lf in deerskin and garments of bark, she
joyfully accompanied the sage.
During the time Lopamudra and Agastya spent in tapas and meditation at
Gangadwara, a strong and abiding love sprang up between them. For
conjugal life, Lopamudra’ s modesty shrank from the lack of privacy in a
forest hermitage , and one day, with blushing and humbleness she expressed
her mind to her husband.
She said: “My desire is that I may have the royal bedding, the beautiful
robes and the valuable jewels I had when I was in my fathers place and that
you too may have splendid garments and ornaments. And then we shall
enjoy life to our heart’ s content.”
Agastya smiling ly replied: “I have neither the wealth nor the facilities to
provide what you want. Are we not beggars living in the forest?”
But Lopamudra knew her lord’ s yogic power , and said: “Lord, you are all-
powerful by the strength of your austerities. You can get the wealth of the
whole world in a moment if you but will.”
Agastya said that no doubt that was so, but, if he spent his austerities in
gaining things of such little moment as riches, they would soon dwindle to
nothing.
She replied: “I do not wish that. What I desire is that you should earn in the
ordinary way suf ficient wealth for us to live in ease and comfort.”Agastya consen ted and set out as an ordinary brahmana to beg of various
kings.
Agastya went to a king who was reputed to be very wealthy .
The sage told the king: “I have come in quest of wealth. Give me what I
seek, without causing any loss or injury to others.”
The king presented a true picture  of the income and expenditure  of the State
and told him he was free to take what he deemed fit. The sage found from
the accounts that there was no balance left. The expenditure of a State turns
out alwa ys to be at least equal to its income. This seems to have been the
case in ancient times also.
Seeing this, Agastya said: “To accept any gift from this king, will be a
hardship to the citizens. So, I shall seek elsewhere," and the sage was about
to leave. The king said that he would also accompany him and both of them
went to another State where also they found the same state of af fairs.
Vyasa thus lays down and illust rates the maxim that a king should not tax
his subje cts more than necessary for rightful public expenditure and that if
one accepts as gift anything from the public revenues, one adds to the
burden of the subjects that extent. Agastya thought he had better go to the
wicked asura Ilvala and try his luck.
Ilvala and his brother Vatapi cherished an implacable hatred towards
brahmanas. They had curious plan for killing them. Ilvala would, with
effective hospitality , invite a brahmana to a feast. By the power of his magic
he would transform his brother Vatapi into a goat and he would kill this
pseudo-goat for food and serve  its meat to the guest. In those days, the
brahmanas used to eat meat.
The feast over, Ilvala would invoke his brother Vatapi to come out, for he
had the art of bringing back to life those whom he had killed. And Vatapi,
who as food had entered the vitals of the unlucky brahmana, would spring
up sound  and whole and rend his way out with fiendish laughter , of course
killing the guest in doing so. In this manner , many brahmanas had died.
Ilvala was very happy when he learnt that Agastya was in the
neighbourhood, since he felt that here was a good brahmana delivered intohis hands. So he welcomed him and prepared the usual feast. The sage ate
heartily of Vatapi transformed into a goat, and it only remained for Ilvala to
call out Vatapi for the rending scene. And, as usual, Ilvala repeated the
magic formula and shouted: “V atapi—come out!”
Agastya smiled  and, gently rubbing his stomach, said: “O Vatapi, be
digested in my stomach for the peace and good of the world.”
Ilvala shouted again and again in frantic fear; “O V atapi, come forth.”
There was no response and the sage explained the reason. Vatapi had been
digested. The trick had been tried once too often.
The asura bowe d to Agastya and surrendered to him the riches  he sought.
Thus was the sage able to satisfy Lopamudra’ s desire.
Agastya asked her what she would prefer: whether ten ordinarily good sons
or one super -good son with the strength of ten. Lopamudra replied she
would like to have one excepti onally virtuous and learned son. The story
goes that she was blessed with such a gifted son.
Once the Vindhy as became jealous of the Meru mountain and tried to grow
in stature, obstructing the sun, the moon and the planets, Unable to prevent
this danger , the gods sought aid from Agastya. The sage went to the
Vindhya mountain and said:
“Best of mountains, stop your growing till I cross you on my way to the
south and return north again. After my return, you can grow as you like.
Wait till then.”
Since the Vindhya mountain respected Agastya, it bowed to his request.
Agastya did not return north at all, but settled in the south and so the
Vindhyas remain  arrested in growth to this day. Such is the story  as narrated
in the Mahabharata.CHAPTER XXXI: RISHYASRINGA
IT is an error to think that it is easy for a person to lead a life of chastity if
he is brought up in complete ignorance of sensual pleasures. Virtue guarded
only by ignorance is very insecure as illustrated by the following story . It is
told in the Ramayana also, but not in the same detail.
Vibhandaka who was resplendent like Brahma, the Creator , lived with his
son Rishyasringa in a forest. The latter had not come across any mortal,
man or woman, except his father .
The country of Anga was once afflicted with a dire famine. Crops had
withered for want of rain and men perished for lack of food. All living
things were in distress. Romapa da, the king of the country , approached the
brahmanas to advise him of some means of saving the kingdom from
famine. The brahmanas replied: “Best of kings, there is a young sage called
Rishyasringa who lives a life of perfect chastity . Invite him to our kingdom.
He has won the power , by his austerities, of bringing rain and plenty
wherever he goes.”
The king discussed with his courtiers the means by which Rishyasringa
could be brought from the hermitage of the sage Vibhandaka. In accordance
with their advice, he called together the most charming courtesans of the
city and entrusted them with the mission of bringing Rishyasringa to Anga.
The damsels were in a quandar y. On the one hand, they feared to disobey
the king: on the other , they also feared the sage‘s wrath. Finally , they made
up their minds to go, relying on Providence to help them in achieving the
good work of rescuing the stricken land from famine. They were suitably
equipped for their enterprise before being sent to the hermitage .
The leader of this band of courtesans made a beautiful garden of a big boat,
with artificial trees and creepers, with an imitation ashrama in the centre.
She had the boat moored in the river near Vibhandaka’ s hermitage, and the
courtesans visited the hermitage with quaking hearts.
Luckily for them, the sage was not at home. Feeling that this was the
opportune moment, one of the beautiful damsels went to the sage’ s son.She thus addressed Rishyasring a: “Great sage, are you well?  Have you
sufficient roots and fruits? Are the penances of the rishis of the forest
proceeding satisfactorily? Is your father ’s glory constantly grow ing? Is your
own study of the Vedas progressing?” This was how rishis used to accost
one another in those days.
The youthful anchorite had never before seen such a beautiful human form
or heard  such a sweet voice. The instinctive yearning for society , especially
of the opposite sex, though he had never seen a woman befor e, began to
work on his mind from the moment he beheld that graceful form. He
thought that she was a young sage like himself, and felt a strange
irrepressible joy surging up in his soul. He answered, fixing eyes on his
interlocutor:
“You seem to be a bright brahm acharin. Who are you? I bow to you. Where
is your hermita ge? What are the austerities you are practisin g?" and he
rendered her the customary of ferings.
She said to him: “At a distance of three yojanas from here is my ashrama. I
have brought fruits for you. I am not fit to receive your prostration, but I
shall return your greetings and salutation in the way customary with us.”
She embraced him warmly , fed him with the sweets she had brought,
decorated him with perfumed garlands, and served him with drinks. She
embraced him again, saying that that was their way of salutation to
honoured guests. He thought it a very agreeable way .
Shortly after fearing the return of the sage Vibhandaka, the courtesan took
her leave of Rishyasringa saying it was time for her to perform the
agnihotra sacrifice and gently slipped out of the hermitage.
When Vibhandaka returned to the hermitage, he was shocked to see the
place so untidy with sweetmeats scattered all over, for the hermitage had
not been cleansed. The shrubs and creepers looked draggled and untidy . His
son’s face had not its usual lustre but seemed clouded and disturbed as by a
storm of passion. The usual simple duties of the hermitage had been
neglected.
Vibhandaka was troubled and asked his son: “Dear boy, why have you not
yet gathered the sacred firewood? Who has broken these nice plants andshrubs? Has the cow been milked? Has anyone been here to serve you?
Who gave you this strange garland? Why do you appear worried?”
The simple and ingenuous Rishyasringa replied: “A brahmacharin of
wonderful form was here. I cannot describe his brightness and beauty or the
sweetness of his voice. My inner being has been filled with indescribable
happiness and affection by listening to his voice and looking at his eyes.
When he embraced me, which it seems is his customary greeting- I
experienced a joy which I have never felt before - no, not even when eating
the sweetest fruits,” and then he described to his father the form beauty and
the doings of his fair visitor .
Rishyasringa added wistfully: “My body seems to burn with desire for the
company of that brahmacharin and I should like to go and find him and
bring him here somehow , How can I give you any idea about his devotion
and brightness" My heart pants to see him. ”
When Rishyasringa had thus brokenly expressed yearnings and
disturbances to which he had hitherto been a stranger . Vibhandaka knew
what had occurred. He said: “Child, this was no brahmacharin that you saw,
but a malignant demon who sought, as demons do, to beguile us and hinder
our pennances and austerities. They take recourse to many kinds of tricks
and stratagems for the purpose. Do not let them come near you.” After that
Vibhandaka searched in vain for three days in the forest to find out the
wretches who had done this injury and returned baf fled in his purpose.
On another occasion, when Vibhandaka had gone out of the hermitage to
bring roots and fruits, the courtesan again came softly to the place where
Rishyasringa was seated. As soon as he saw her at a distance, Rishyasringa
jumped up and ran to greet her gushingly as pent up water surges out of a
reservoir that has sprung a leak.
Even without waiting for promp ting this time, Rishyasringa went near her
and after the customary salutation said: “O shining brahmacharin, before
my father returns let us go to your hermitage.”
This was just what she had hoped and worked for. And together they
entered the boat which had been  made to look like a hermitage. As soon as
the young sage had entered, the boat was freed from its moorings andfloated easily down with its welcome freight to the kingdom of Anga. As
might be expected, the young sage had a pleasant and interesting journey
and when he reached Anga, he certainly knew more about the world and its
ways than he had done in the forest.
The coming of Rishyasringa delighted Romapada infinitely and he took his
welcome guest to the luxuriously provided inner apartments specially
prepared for him. As foretold by the brahmanas, rain began to pour the
instant Rishyasringa set his foot in the country , the rivers and the lakes were
full and the people rejoiced. Romapada gave his daughter Santa in marriage
to Rishyasringa.
Though all ended as he had planned, the king was uneasy in his mind, for
he was afraid that Vibhandaka might come in search of his son and
pronounce a curse on him. So, he sought to mollify Vibhandaka by lining
the route he would take with cattle and kind and by instructing the
cowherds in charge to say that they were Rishyasringa’ s serva nts and had
come to welcome and honour their master ’s father and place themselves at
his service.
Not finding his son anywhere in the hermitage, the enraged Vibhandaka
thought that this might be the work of the king of Anga. He crossed
intervening rivers and villages and marched to the capital of the king as if to
burn him in his anger , but as at each stage of the journey he saw
magnificent cattle which belonged to his son and was respectfully
welcomed by his son’s servants, his angry mood passed gradually as he
approached the capital.
When he came to the capital, he was received with great honour and taken
to the king’ s palace where he saw his son sitting in state like the king of the
gods in heaven. He saw by his side his wife, the princess Santa, whose great
beauty soothed and pleased him.
Vibhandaka blessed the king. He laid this injunction on his son: “Do all that
will please this king. After the birth of a son, come and join me in the
forest.” Rishyasringa did as his father bade him.
Lomasa concluded the story with these words addressed to Yudhishthira:
“Like Damayan ti and Nala, Sita and Rama. Arundhati and Vasishtha,Lopamudra and Agastya, and Draupadi and yourself, Santa and
Rishyasringa repaired to the forest in the fulness of time and spent their
lives in mutual love and the worship of God. This is the hermitage where
Rishyasringa lived. Bathe in these waters and be purified.” The Pandavas
bathed there and performed their devotions.CHAPTER XXXII: FRUITLESS PENANCE:
STORY OF YAVAKRIDA
IN the course of their wanderings, the Pandavas reached the hermitage of
Raibhya on the banks of the Ganga.
Lomasa told them the story of the place:
“This is the ghat where Bharata, the son of Dasaratha, bathed. Indra was
cleansed of the sin of killing Vritra unfairly , by these waters. Here also
Sanatkumara became one with God. Aditi, the mother of the gods, offered
oblations on this mountain and prayed to be blessed with a son. O
Yudhishthira, ascend this holy mountain and the misfortunes which have
cast a cloud on your life, will vanish. Anger and passion will be washed off
if you bathe in the running waters of this river ."
Then Lomasa expatiated in greater detail on the sanctity of the place.
He bega n the story thus: “Yavak rida, the son of a sage, met with destruction
in this very place.”
He continued: “There lived in their hermitages two eminent brahmanas,
named Bharadw aja and Raibhya, who were dear friends. Raibhya and his
two sons, Paravasu and Arvav asu, learnt the Vedas and became famed
scholars. Bharad waja devoted himself wholly to the worship of God. He
had a son name d Yavakrida who saw with jealousy and hatred that the
brahmanas did not respect his ascetic father as they did the learned Raihhya.
Yavakrida practi sed hard penance to gain the grace of Indra. He tortured his
body with austerities and thus awakened the compassion of Indra, who
appeared and asked him why he so mortified his flesh.
Yavakrida replie d: “I wish to be more learned in the Vedas than any has
ever been before. I wish to be a great scholar . I am performing these
austcrities to realise that desire . It takes a long time and involves much
hardshin to learn the Vedas from a teacher . I am practising austerities to
acquire that knowledge directl y. Bless me.” Indra smiled and said: “O
brahmana, you are on the wrong path. Return home, seek a proper preceptorand learn the Vedas from him. Austerity is not the way to learni ng: the path
is study and study alone.” W ith these words Indra vanished.
But the son of Bharadwaja would not give up. He pursued his course of
austerities with even greater rigour, to the horror and the distress of the
gods. Indra again manifested himself before Yavakrida and warned him
again: “You have taken the wrong path to acquire knowledge. You can
acquire knowledge only by study . Your father learnt the Vedas by patient
study and so can you. Go and study the Vedas. Desist from this vain
mortification of the body ."
Yavakrida did not heed even this second warning of Indra and announced
defiantly that if his prayer was not granted, he would cut off his limbs one
by one and of fer them as oblations to the fire. No, he would never give up.
He continued his penance. One morning, during his austerities, when he
went to bathe in the Ganga, he saw a gaunt old brahmana on the bank,
laboriously throwing handfuls of sand into the water .
Yavakrida asked: “Old man, what are you doing?”
The old man replied: “I am going to build a dam across this river. When,
with handful after handful, I have built a dam of sand here, people can cross
the river  with ease. See how very difficult it is at present to cross it. Useful
work, isn’ t it?"
Yavakrida laughed and said: “What a fool you must be to think you can
build a dam across this mighty river with your silly handfuls of sand! Arise
and take to some more useful work .
The old man said: “Is my proje ct more foolish than yours of mastering the
Vedas not by study but by austerities?”
Yavakrida now knew that the old man was Indra. More humble this time,
Yavakrida earnestly begged Indra to grant him learning as a personal boon.
Indra blessed, and comforted Y avakrida with the following words:
“Well, I grant you the boon you seek. Go and study the Vedas; you will
become learned.”CHAPTIER XXXIII: YAVAKRIDA’S END
YAVAKRIDA studied the V edas and became learned. He grew vain with the
thought that he had acquired the knowledge of the Vedas through the boon
of Indra and not through human tutelage. Bharadwaja did not like this and
feared that his son might ruin himself by slighting Raibhya. He thought it
necessary to warn him.
“The gods,” he said, “grant boons to foolish people who persistently
practise penances, as intoxicants are sold to fools for money . They lead to
loss of self-control, and this leads to the warping of the mind and utter
destruction.” He illustrated his advice by the ancient tale which is given
below:
In olden times there was a celebrated sage named Baladhi. He had a son
whose untimely  death plunged him into grief. So, he practis ed rigorous
penance to get a son who would never meet with death.
The gods told the sage that this could never be, for the human race was
necessarily mortal, and there need must be a limit to human life. They asked
him to name his own limit. The sage replied: “In that case grant  that the life
of my son may persist as long as that mountain lasts.” The boon was
granted to him and he was duly blessed with a son named Medhavi.
Medhavi grew conceited at the thought that he was safe from death forever ,
since he would live as long as the mountain existed, and he behaved with
arrogance towards all.
One day, this vain man showed disrespect to a great sage named
Dhanushaksha. At once that sage cursed that he might be turned to ashes,
but the curse took no effect on Medhavi who remained in perfect health.
Seeing this, the high-souled sage was non-plussed and then remembered the
gift Medhavi had been endowed with at birth.
Dhanushaksha took the form of a wild buffalo and by the power of his
penances butted  at the mountai n and broke it to pieces and Medhavi fell
down dead.Bharadwaja concluded the story with this solemn warning to his son:
“Learn wisdom from this old story. Be not ruined by vanity . Cultivate self-
restraint. Do not transgress the limits of, good conduct and do not be
disrespectful to the great Raibhya.”
It was spring time. The trees and creepers were beautiful with flowers and
the whole forest was gor geous with colour and sweet with the song of birds.
The very earth seemed to be under the spell of the god of love. Paravasu’ s
wife was strollin g alone in the garden near the hermitage of Raibhya. She
appeared more than human in the sweet union in her of beauty , courage and
purity . At that time Yavakrida came there and was so overwhelmed by her
loveliness that he completely lost his sense and self-control and became as a
ravening beast with lust. He accosted her and taking brutal advantage of her
fear and shame and bewilderment. He dragged her to a lonely spot and
violated her person.
Raibhya returne d to his hermitage. He saw his daughter in-law weeping,
broken-hearted and inconsolable and learning of the shameful outrage
perpetrated on her, he was seized with implacable anger . He plucked a hair
from his head and of fered it to the fire reciting a mantra.
At once, a maiden, as beautiful as his daughter -in-law emer ged from the
sacrificial fire. The sage plucked another hair from his knotted lock and
offered it as oblation. A terrible ghost rose from the fire. The sage
commanded them to kill Y avakrida. Both of them bowed to the order .
While Yavakrid a was performing the morning rites, the female spirit went
near him and with smiles and allurements put him off his guard and as she
ran away with his water -jug, the male ghost rushed on him with uplifted
spear .
Yavakrida stood  up in fear. Knowing that his mantras would be of no avail
until he cleansed  himself with water, he looked for his water -jug. When he
found it missing, he rushed to a pond for water but the pond was dry. He
went to a nearby  stream which also dried up at his approach. There was no
water for him anywhere. The terrible fiend pursued him everywhere and
Yavakrida fled for his life with the demon hot on his heels. His sin had
consumed the power of his vigils and fasts. At last, he sought refuge in thesacrificial hall of his father . The half blind man who was guarding the
hermitage stopped him as he could not recognise Yavakrida as, distorted
with mortal fear, he sought to force his way in. Meanwhile, the fiend
overtook him and killed him with his spear .
When Bharadwaja returned to his hermitage, he came upon his son’s corpse
and concluded that disrespect to Raibhya must have led to this cruel fate.
“Alas! My child, you died of your pride and vanity . Was it not a great
mistake that you tried to learn the Vedas in a way not resorte d to by any
brahmana? Why did you behave so as to be cursed thus? May Raibhya, who
caused the death of my only son, be himself killed by one of his sons!”
Thus, carried away by rage and grief the sage cursed Raibhya.
Regaining control soon, he exclaimed in anguish: “Alas! They alone are
blessed who have no sons. I have not only lost my only son, but in the
madness of my grief I have also cursed my friend and compani on. What is
the use of continuing my life?" He cremated his son’s body and died by
throwing himself on the funeral pyre.CHAPTER XXXIV: MERE LEARNING IS NOT
ENOUGH
KING Brihadyumna, a disciple of the sage Raibhya, performed a great
sacrifice at which he requested his teacher to let his two sons Paravasu and
Arvavasu officiate. With the permission of their father , both of them went
joyfully to the capital of the king.
While arrangements were being  made for the sacrifice. Paravasu desired
one day to go and see his wife and, walking alone all night, he reached his
hermitage befor e dawn. Near the hermitage, he saw in the gleaming, what
seemed to him a beast of prey crouching for a spring and, hurling his
weapon at it, killed it. But to his horror and grief, he discovered  that he had
killed his own father clad in skins, mistaking him for a wild denizen of the
forest. He realised that the fatal mistake was the effect of the curse of
Bharadwaja. When he had hastily performed the funeral rites of his father ,
he went to Arvavasu and told him the doleful tale. He said: “But this
mishap should not interfere with the sacrifice of the king. Please do the rites
on my behalf in expiation of the sin I have unwittingly committed. There is,
mercifully , atonement for sins committed in ignorance. If you can be my
substitute here for under going the expiation I shall be able to go and assist
in conducting the king’ s sacrific e. I can officiate unaided, whic h is a thing
you cannot do as yet.”
The virtuous brother agreed and said: “You may attend to the king’ s
sacrifice. I shall do penance to free you from the terrible taint of having
killed a father and a brahmana.”
The virtuous Arvavasu, accordingly , took upon himself the expiatory rites
on behalf of his brother . That done, he came to the court of the king to join
his brother and assist in the sacrifice.
The sin of Paravasu was not washed off, since expiation cannot be by
proxy . It tainted his mind with wicked designs. Becoming jealous of the
radiance on his brother ’s face, Paravasu decided to dishonour him by
casting on him an unjust aspersi on and accordingly , when Arvavasu entered
the hall. Paravasu loudly exclaimed so that the king might hear: “This manhas committed the sin of killing a brahmana and how can he enter this holy
sacrificial place?”
Arvavasu indignantly denied the accusation but none heeded him, and he
was ignominiously expelled from that hall of sacrifice by the orders of the
king.
Arvavasu repea tedly protested his innocence. “It is my brother who has
committed the sin-and even then it was through it mistake. I have saved him
by perfo rming expiatory rites. ” This made matters worse for him for
nobody believed that the expiation he had under gone was not for his own
crime and everyone thought that he was adding false accusation against a
blameless brother , to his other sins.
The virtuous Arvavasu who, besides being falsely accused of a monstrous
crime, was also traduced as a liar, retreated to the forest in despair of
finding justice in the world and betook himself to rigorous austerities.
The gods were gracious and asked him: “O virtuous soul, what  is the boon
you seek?” High thinking and deep meditation had in the meantime
cleansed his heart of all anger at his brother ’s conduct; and so, he only
prayed that his father might be restored to life and that his broth er might be
freed from wickedness and the sins that he had committed.
The gods granted his prayer .
Lomasa narrated this story to Yudhishthira at a place near Raibhya’ s
hermitage and said: “O Pandava s, bathe here and wash off your passions in
this holy river .”
Arvavasu and Paravasu were both sons of a great scholar . Both of them
learnt at his feet and became eminent scholars themselves. But learning is
one thing and virtue is quite another . It is true that one should know the
difference betwe en good and evil, if one is to seek good and shun evil, but
this knowledge should soak into every thought and influence every act in
one’s life. Then indeed knowledge becomes virtue. The knowledge, that is
merely so much undigested information crammed into the mind, cannot
instil virtue. It is just an outward show like our clothes and is no real part of
us.CHAPTER XXXV: ASHTAVAKRA
WHILE the Pandavas were wandering among holy places in the forest, they
came one day to the hermitag e of the personages immortalised in the
Upanishads. Lomasa told Y udhishthira the story of that place.
Uddalaka, a great sage and teacher of V edanta, had a disciple named Kagola
who was virtuous and devoted  but had no great learning. So, the other
disciples used to laugh and mock at him. Uddalaka, however , attached no
great weight to his disciple’ s lack of erudition but really appreciated his
virtues, devotion and good conduct and gave his daughter Sujata in
marriage to him.
The couple was blessed with a son. A child generally inherits the
characteristics of both the parents, but fortunately the grandson of Uddalaka
took after his grandfather rathe r than his father and knew the Vedas even
while he was in his mother ’s womb. When Kagola made mistakes, as he
often did in reciting the Vedas, the child in the womb would twist his body
with pain, and so it came to pass that he had eight crooks in his body when
he was born. These crooks earned him the name of Ashtavakra which
means “Eight-crooks.”
Kagola, one ill-fated day, provoked a polemical contest with Vandi, the
court scholar of Mithila, and, having been defeated, was made to drown
himself.
Meanwhile Ashtavakra grew up to be a towering scholar even in his
boyhood, and at the age of twelv e he had already completed his study of the
Vedas and the V edanta.
One day, Ashtav akra learnt that Janaka, the king of Mithila was performing
a great sacrifice  in the course of which the assembled scholar s would, as
usual, debate on the sastras. Ashtavakra set out for Mithila, accompanied by
his uncle Swetaketu.
On their way to the place of sacrifice at Mithila, they came across the king
and his retinue.  The attendants of the king marched in front shouting:
“Move away. Make way for the King.” Ashtavakra instead of moving out of
the way said to the retainers:“O royal attendants, even the king, if he is righteous, has to move and make
way for the blind, the deformed, the fair sex, persons bearing loads and
brahmanas learned in the V edas. This is the rule enjoined by the scriptures.”
The king, surpri sed at these wise words of the brahmana boy, accepted the
justness of the rebuke and made way, observing to his attend ants: “What
this brahmana stripling says is true. Fire is fire whether it is tiny or big and
it has the power to burn.”
Ashtavakra and Swetaketu entered the sacrificial hall.
The gatekeeper stopped them and said: “Boys cannot go in. Only old men
learned in the V edas may go into the sacrificial hall.”
Ashtavakra replied: “We are not mere boys. We have observed the
necessary vows and have learnt the Vedas. Those who have mastered the
truths of the Vedanta will not judge another on mere considerations of age
or appearance.”
The gate-keeper said: “Stop. Have done with your idle brag. How can you,
a mere boy , have learnt and realised the V edanta?” '
The boy said: “You mean I am not big like an over-grown gourd with no
substance in it? Size is no indic ation of knowledge or worth, nor is age. A
very tall old man may be a tall old fool. Let me pass.”
The gate-keeper said: “You are certainly not old, nor tall, though you talk
like all the hoary sages. Get out.”
Ashtavakra replied: “Gate-keeper , grey hairs do not prove the ripeness of
the soul. The really mature man is the one who has learnt the Vedas and the
Veclangas, mast ered their gist and realised their essence. I am here to meet
the court pandit V andi. Inform King Janaka of my desire.”
At that moment the king himself came there and easily recognized
Ashtavakra, the precociously wise boy he had met before.
The king asked:  “Do you know that my court pandit Vandi has overthrown
in argument many great scholars in the past and caused them to be cast into
the ocean? Does not that deter you from this dangerous adventure?”Ashtavakra replied: “Your eminent scholar has not hitherto encountered
men like me who are proficient in the Vedas or Vedanta. He has become
arrogant and vain with easy victories over good men who were not real
scholars. I have come here to repay the debt due on account of my father ,
who was defeated by this man and made to drown himself, as I have heard
from my mother . I have no doubt I shall vanquish V andi, whom you will see
crumple up like a broken-wheeled cart. Please summon him.”
Ashtavakra met Vandi. They took up a debatable thesis and started an
argument, each employing his utmost learning and wits to confound the
other; and in the end the assembly unanimously declared the victory of
Ashtavakra and the defeat of Vandi. The court pandit of Mithila bowed his
head and paid the forfeit by drowning himself in the ocean and going to the
abode of V aruna.
Then the spirit of Kagola, the father of Ashtavakra, gained peace and joy in
the glory of his son. The author of the epic instructs us through these words
put in Kagola’ s mouth :
“A son need not be like his father . A father who is physically weak may
have a very strong son and an ignorant father may have a scholarly son. It is
wrong to assess the greatness of a man on his physical appearance or age.
External appearances are deceptive.”
Which shows that the unlearned Kagola was not devoid of common sense.CHAPTER XXXVI: BHIMA AND HANUMAN
DRAUP ADI used to complain frequently: “This Kamyaka forest is not
beautiful without Arjuna. I find no joy in life in the absence of Arjuna.”
The other Pandavas shared Draupadi’ s wretchedness at separation from
Arjuna, who had gone to the Himalayas in quest of divine weapons.
Bhimasena told Draupadi: “Blessed lady, I myself feel the same about
Arjuna and what you say makes  me thrill with love and sympathy . Bereft of
Arjuna, this beautiful forest seems desolate. My mind can know no peace
without seeing Arjuna. Sahadeva, how do you feel?”
Sahadeva said: “This hermitage seems to be empty without Arjuna. We
shall try whether a change of scene will help us to bear the pain of
separation better .”
Yudhishthira addressing his priest Dhaumya said: “I have sent my younger
brother Arjuna to win divine weapons. That dauntless and dexterous hero
has not yet retur ned. We have sent him to the Himalayas to get from Indra,
the king of gods, weapons with which we could conquer Bhishma, Drona,
Kripa and Aswatthama, since it is certain that these heroes will fight on the
side of the sons of Dhritarashtra. Karna knows the secret of divine weapons,
and his supreme wish is to fight with Arjuna. I have sent Arjuna to gain
Indra’ s grace and get weapons  from him as the Kaurava heroes can be
defeated by no other means. Having sent him on a very difficult errand, we
cannot live here happily , for we miss him in all our accustomed haunts. I
wish to go elsewhere, for that may enable us to bear the separation better .
Can you suggest where we could go?”
Dhaumya described many forests and holy places. The Pandavas went the
round of those places to relieve themselves to some extent from the pangs
of separation. They spent many  years in this pilgrimage and in listening to
the traditions which sanctified each shrine. Draupadi would  often feel
exhausted by having to traverse mountains and forests. Bhima, sometimes
helped by his son Ghatotkacha, would serve and encourage them  and make
their labours easy .In the course of their wanderings through the Himalayan regions they came
to a terrible forest where the path was rugged and steep. Yudhishthira was
worried and told Bhima that the way would greatly distress Draupadi but
that he himself would go on accompanied by Nakula and the sage Lomasa.
He suggested that Bhima and Sahadeva should stay behind at Gangadwara
with Draupadi.
Bhima would not agree. He said that the pain of separation from Arjuna
ought to have taught his brother how much he would suffer if he was parted
from Sahadeva, Draupadi and Bhima. Besides, Bhima could not leave
Yudhishthira alone in this forest infested with rakshasas, demons and wild
animals. The way was hard, but he could easily carry Draupadi across the
most dif ficult parts of it. He could carry Nakula and Sahadeva also.
When Bhima said these words Y udhishthira embraced him and blessed him
and wished him an increase of physical strength.
Draupadi smiled and said, addressing Yudhishthira: “No one need carry me.
I can walk. Do not be anxious about me.”
They reached Kulinda, the kingdom of Subahu, on the Hima layas. They
accepted the honours rendered to them by that king and rested there awhile.
Later on, they went to the charming forest of Narayanasrama  and halted
there.
One day, a breeze that blew from the north-east wafted a beautiful flower
near Draupadi. Draupadi took it in her hands and was so charm ed with its
fragrance and beauty that she showed it rapturously to Bhima. “Come and
see this flower . What a sweet fragrance! How charming! I shall hand this
over to Yudhishthira. Bring some flowers of this kind. We should grow this
plant in our Kamyaka forest.” Draupadi ran to give the flower to
Yudhishthira.
Anxious to please his beloved Draupadi, Bhima went in quest of that plant.
He went  alone in the direction from which the fragrance seemed  to be borne
by the breeze, without wasting a thought on the wild beasts that crossed his
path.
He presently came to a garden of plantain trees at the foot of a mountain,
and there he saw a huge monke y shining like blazing fire, which lay rightacross his path blocking it. He tried to frighten the animal out of his way by
shouting at it: it only half opened its eyes lazily and drawled: “I am
indisposed and so I am lying here. Why did you wake me? You are a wise
human being and I am mere animal. It is only proper that the rational man
should'show mercy to animals as inferior creatures. I am afraid you are
ignorant of right and wrong. Who are you? Whither are you bound? It is not
possible to go further along this mountain path which is the path of the
gods. Men cann ot cross this limit. Eat what you like of the fruits of this
place and if you are wise, go back in peace.”
Bhima, unused to being taken so lightly , grew angry and shouted : “Who are
you, yourself, you monkey , that indulges in such tall talk? I am a kshatriya
hero, a descendant of the Kuru race and a son of Kunti. Know that I am the
son of the Wind god. Now move away from the path or stop me at your
peril."
Hearing these words the monkey merely smiled and said: “I am, as you say,
a monkey , but you will come to destruction if you try to force a way .”
Bhima said: “I do not want your advice and it is no concern of yours if I go
to destruction. Get up and move out of the way or I will make you.”
The monkey replied: "I have no strength to stand up, being but a very old
monkey . If you have to go at any cost, jump over me.”
Bhima said: “Nothing could be easier but the scriptures forbid it. Otherwise
I should jump over you and the mountain in one bound, like Hanuman
crossing the ocean.”
The monkey remarked as thoug h in surprise: “O best of men, who is that
Hanuman who crossed the ocean? If you know his story , enlighten me.”
Bhima roared and said: “Have you not heard of Hanuman, my elder brother ,
who crossed the ocean, a hundred yojanas in breadth, to seek and find Sita,
the wife of Rama? I am equal to him in strength and heroism. Well, that is
enough talk, now get up and make way and do not provoke me to do you
some harm.”
The monkey answered: “O mighty hero, be patient. Be gentle as you are
strong, and have mercy on the old and weak. I have no strength to rise up asI am decrepit with age. Since you have scruples in jumping over me, kindly
move aside my tail and make a path for yourself.”
Proud of his immense strength,  Bhima thought to pull the monkey out of
the way by its tail. But, to his amazement he could not move it in the least,
though he exerted all his strength. He set his jaws and strained every muscle
till the very sinews cracked and he was covered with perspiration, but, still,
could not move  that tail the least, a little bit up or down or sideways. In
shame, he bent down his head, and then asked in a chastened mood: “Who
are you? Forgive me and revea l to me whether you are a siddha, god or
gandharva.” Bhima like most strong men, was all respect when  he saw one
stronger than himself, and spoke like a pupil addressing his master .
Hanuman replied: “O mighty-ar med Pandava, know that I am your brother ,
even that Hanuman, the son of the Wind god whom you menti oned a little
while ago. If you go on this path, which is the road to the spirit-world where
the yakshas and the rakshasas abide, you will meet with danger and that is
why I stop you. No man can go beyond this and live. But here is the stream
with its depths where you can find the Saugandhika plant you came to
seek.”
Bhima was transported with delight: “I count myself the most fortunate of
men in that I have been blessed to meet my brother . I wish to see the form
in which you crossed the ocean,” and he prostrated before Hanuman.
Hanuman smiled  and began to increase the size of his body and stood four
square to the world like a moun tain, seeming to fill the landsc ape. Bhima
was thrilled at actually seeing that divine form of this elder brother , the
mere description of which had till then filled him with wonder . He covered
his eyes, unable to bear the dazzling light radiating from that figure.
Hanuman said: “Bhima, in the presence of my enemies, my body can grow
still more.”
And Hanuman contracted his body, resuming his former size. He tenderly
embraced Bhimasena.
Bhagavan Vyasa says that Bhima felt completely refreshed and became
much stronger than before by the embrace of Hanuman.Hanuman said: “O hero, go to your abode. Think of me whenever you are
in need. I felt the same delight when I embraced you that I had in times of
yore when I was fortunate enough to touch the divine body of Sri Rama.
Ask any boon that you like.”
Bhima said: “Blessed are the Pandavas for I have had the good fortune to
see you. Inspired with your strength we are sure to conquer our enemies.”
Hanuman gave this parting blessing to his brother:
“While you roar like a lion in the battlefield, my voice shall join yours and
strike terror into the hearts of your enemies. I shall be present on the flag of
the chariot of your brother Arjuna. Y ou will be victorious.”
Hanuman pointed out to Bhima the stream hard by, where grew the
Saugandhika flowers he had come to seek. This put Bhima at once in mind
of Draupadi who was waiting for his return, and he collected the flowers
and returned to her without delay .CHAPTER XXXVII: I AM NO CRANE
ONCE the sage Markandeya came to see the Pandavas. Yudhishthira
happened to talk of the virtues of the fair sex and said:
“What greater wonder is there  in this world than the patience and the
chastity of woman? She gives birth to a child after cherishing it in her
womb as dearer than life itself. She brings it into the world in pain and
anxiety and thence forward her one thought is for its health and happiness.
Largehearted and forgiving, a woman forgives and continues to love even a
wicked husband  who neglects and hates and subjects her to all sorts of
miseries. How strange!"
Hearing this Markandeya told him a sacred story .
There was once a brahmana named Kausika who observed his vow of
brahmacharya with great steadfastness and devotion. One day, he sat under
a tree reciting the Vedas. A crane, perched on the top of the tree, defiled his
head with its droppings. He looked up at it and his angry look killed the
bird and it fell down dead. The brahmana was pained when he saw the dead
bird lying on the ground.
How frightful it would be if wishes fulfilled themselves, if each hasty or
angry wish took effect at once ! How much there would be to regret or
repent afterwar ds! It is lucky for us that wishes depend on outward
circumstances for accomplishment, since that saves us from much sin and
sorrow .
Kausika sorrowe d that the evil thought that passed in his mind in a moment
of anger had killed an innocent  bird. Some time later, he went as usual to
beg alms.
He stood  before  the door of a house to receive his dole. The housewife was
cleansing utensils at that time. Kausika waited in the hope that she would
attend to him after her work was over. In the meantime the master of the
house returned, tired and hungr y, and the wife had to attend to his wants,
wash and dry his feet and serve him with food. In this preocc upation she
seemed to have forgotten the mendicant waiting outside. After her husbandhad been cared for and fed, she came out with aims to the mendicant. She
said: “I am sorry to have kept you waiting long. Pardon me.”
Kausika, burning with anger , said: “Lady , you have made me wait for such
a long time. This indif ference is not fair .”
The woman told the brahmana: “Best of brahmanas, kindly do forgive me. I
was serving my husband and hence the delay . ’
The brahmana remarked: “It is right and proper to attend on the husband,
but the brahmana also should not be disregarded. You seem an arrogant
woman.”
She said: “Be not angry with me and remember that I kept you waiting only
because I was dutifully serving my husband. I am no crane to be killed by a
violent thought and your rage can do no harm to the woman who devotes
herself to the service of her husband.”
The brahmana was taken aback. He wondered how the woman knew of the
crane incident.
She continued: “O great one, you do not know the secret of duty and you
are also not aware that anger is the greatest enemy that dwells in man.
Forgive the delay in attending to you. Go to Mithila and be instructed in the
secret of good life by Dharmavyadha living in that city .”
The brahmana was amazed. He said: “I deserve your just admonition and it
will do me good. May all good attend you.” With these words he went to
Mithila.
Kausika reached Mithila and looked for Dharmavyadha’ s residence, which
he thoug ht woul d be some lonely hermitage far from the noise and bustle of
common life. He walked along magnificent roads between beau tiful houses
and gardens in that great city and finally reached a butcher ’s shop, in which
was a man selling meat. His amazement was great when he learnt that this
man was Dharmavyadha.
The brahmana was shocked beyond measure and stood at a distance in
disgust. The butcher suddenly rose from his seat, came to the brahmana and
inquired: “Revered sir, are you well? Did that chaste brahmana lady send
you to me?” The brahmana was stupefied.“Revered sir , I know why you have come. Let us go home,” said the butcher
and he took the brahmana to his house where he saw a happy family and
was greatly struck by the devotion with which the butcher served his
parents. Kausik a took his lessons from that butcher on dharma, man’ s
calling and duty. Afterwards, the brahmana returned to his hous e and began
to tend his parents, a duty which he had rather neglected before.
The moral of this striking story of Dharmavyadha so skilfully  woven by
Vedavyasa into the Mahabharata, is the same as the teaching of the Gita,
that man reaches perfection by the honest pursuit of whatever calling falls
to his lot in life, and that this is really worship of God Who created and
pervades all.* The occupation may be one he is born to in society or it may
have been forced on him by circumstances or he may have taken it up by
choice but what really matters is the spirit of sincerity and faithfulness with
which he does his life’s work.  Vedavyasa emphasises this great truth by
making a scholarly brahmana, who did not know it, learn it from a butcher ,
who lived it in his humble and despised life.
Bhagavad Gita XVIII,45-46CHAPTER XXXVIII: THE WICKED ARE NEVER
SATISFIED
MANY brahmanas visited the Pandavas during their exile, and one such,
returning to Hastinapura, went to see Dhritarashtra, who received him with
due honour . The brahmana told him how the Pandavas, born princes, were,
by unkind destiny , at the mercy of the wind and the sun and suffered great
privations. Dhrit arashtra was probably sorry to hear this, but what troubled
him most was the consequences to his own sons. Could Yudhishthira
continue to hold the justly wrathful Bhima in check? Dhritarashtra feared
that the anger of the Pandava s, long pent up, might one day break its
bounds and overflow in a devastating flood. The king anxiously pondered
thus: “Arjuna and Bhima will certainly try to punish us. Sakuni, Karna,
Duryodhana and the short-sighted Duhsasana are perched precariously up a
tree in search of a honeycomb while below is the abyss of Bhima’ s anger
yawning to receive them to their destruction.”
The blind king pursued his thought: “Alas, why did we becom e a prey to
covetousness? It is not as though  poverty drove us to it! Why did we take to
the path of injustice? Instead of enjoying our boundless wealth in
contentment we succumbed to lust of power and possession and coveted
what was not ours. Wrong cannnot but yield its bitter harvest! Arjuna has
returned from heaven with divine weapons. What could tempt one back to
earth from heav en but the cravin g for vengeance? And we have  earned it!”
These thoughts would haunt and give him no peace.
Though Dhritarashtra was thus worried, Sakuni, Karna and Duryodhana
were giddily happy and found much pleasure in exulting congratulation of
one another on their prosperity . Karna and Sakuni said to Duryodhana:
“The kingdom which was in the hands of Yudhishthira has become ours.
We need  no longer burn with jealousy .” Duryodhana replied: “O Karna, all
that is true, but would it not be a joy of joys to see with my own eyes the
sufferings of the Pandavas and bring their sorrow to a climax by a display
of our happines s? The only way to perfect our happiness is to go to the
forest and see the distress of the Pandavas, but my father will refusepermission,” and Duryodhana shed tears at his father ’s cruelty in denying
him this pleasure.
He said again: “The king fears  the Pandavas, as he thinks that they are
endowed with the power of austerities, and forbids us to go to the forest and
meet them, lest danger should befall us. But I tell you, all we have done so
far is labour lost, without a sight of the sufferings of Draupadi,  Bhima and
Arjuna in the forest. This life of idle ease is torment to me without that
great joy. Sakuni and yourself must seek a way of obtaining the king’ s
consent for us to go to the forest and see the Pandavas in their misery .”
Early next morning, Karna went to Duryodhana with a cheerf ul face and
announced that he had found a way out of the difficulty . He said: “What do
you think of going to our ranche s at Dwaitavana for the annual stock-taking
of the cows? The king certainly cannot object to that.” Sakuni and
Duryodhana applauded this bright idea and sent the leader of the cowherds
to the king to secure his permission.
But the king would not assent. He said: “Hunting is indeed beneficial to the
princes. It is also desirable to take stock of the cows. But I learn that the
Pandavas are dwelling in that forest. It is not advisable for you to go there. I
cannot agree to send you to a place near the abode of Bhima and Arjuna
while there is still occasion for anger and strife. ”
Duryodhana said: “We shall not go near them. On the contrary we shall be
very careful and avoid them.”
The king answe red: “However careful you may be, there is danger in mere
nearness. Also, it is not right to intrude on the sorrows of the Pandavas in
their forest life. Any one of your soldiers might trespass and give offence,
which may lead to trouble. Some one else can go in your stead to count the
cattle.”
Sakuni said: “O king, Yudhishth ira knows and follows the path of dharma.
He has given his promise in the open assembly and the Pandavas will
follow his bidding. The sons of Kunti will not show any enmity  towards us.
Do not oppose Duryodhana who is fond of hunting. Let him return after
taking stock of the cows. I shall  also accompany him and see to it that none
of us go anywhere near the Pandavas.”The king, overpersuaded as usual, said: “W ell, please yourselves.”
A heart full of hate can know no contentment. Hate is a cruel fire which
extorts the fuel on which it lives and grows.CHAPTER XXXIX: DURYODHANA
DISGRACED
THE Kauravas reached Dwaitav ana with a great army and many followers.
Duryodhana and Karna went with unconcealed joy at the very thought of
being able to gloat on the sad plight of the Pandavas. They themselves
camped in luxurious rest-houses  in a place four miles off the abode of the
Pandavas.
They inspected the herds of cows and took stock of them. After counting
the cows, bulls and calves, they enjoyed the dance, the hunt, the sylvan
sports and other entertainments arranged for them.
While hunting, Duryodhana and his party reached an attractive pond near
the hermitage of the Pandavas and ordered a camp to be put on its bank.
Chitrasena, the king of the gandharvas, and his attendants had already
encamped in the neighbourh ood of the pool and they prevented
Duryodhana’ s men from putting up their camp. They returned to
Duryodhana and represented that some petty prince who was there with his
followers was giving them trouble.
Duryodhana was nettled at this presumption and directed his men to turn
the princelet out and put up the tents.
The attendants returned to the lake and tried to carry out their orders but
found the gandharvas too many for them and had to retreat in precipitation.
When Duryodha na came to know of this, he grew very angry and with a
large army marched to destroy the audacious enemies who had dared to
resist his pleasure.
A great fight ensued between the gandharvas and Duryodhana ’s army . At
first the fight went in favour of the Kauravas, but the tables were quickly
turned when Chitrasena, the king of the gandharvas, rallied his troops and
began using his magic weapons . Karna and the other Kaurava  heroes lost
their chariots and weapons and had to retreat in haste and ignominy .
Duryodhana alone remained in the battlefield but he was soon seized by
Chitrasena, who placed him in his chariot bound hand and foot, and blewhis conch in token of victory . The gandharvas took many of the prominent
Kauravas captive. The Kaurava army tied in all directions and some of the
fugitives took refuge in the hermitage of the Pandavas.
Bhima heard the news of Duryo dhana’ s defeat and capture with delight and
amusement. He said to Yudhish thira: “These gandharvas have done our job
for us. Duryodhana, who must have come here to mock at us, has got what
he deserved. I feel like thanking our gandharva friend!”
But Y udhishthira reproved him: “Dear brother , this is not the time for you to
rejoice. The Kauravas are our kith and kin and their humiliation, at the
hands of strangers, is ours. We cannot hold back and take this lying down.
We must rescue them.”
Bhima did not think this very reasonable.
He said: “Why should we save this sinner who tried to burn us alive in the
wax house? Why should you feel sorry for the fellow who poisoned my
food, bound me hand and foot and wanted to drown me in the river? What
brotherly feeling can we really have towards these vile wretches who
hauled Draupadi by the hair to the assembly and disgraced her?”
At that moment a cry of agony from Duryodhana reached them faintly from
the distance and Yudhishthira, greatly moved, overruled Bhima’ s objection
and bade his brothers go to the rescue of the Kauravas. Obedient to his
behest, Bhima and Arjuna rallied the routed Kaurava forces and offered
battle to the gandharvas. But Chitrasena had no wish to fight with the
Pandavas and at their approach, released Duryodhana and the other
prisoners saying that all he wanted was to teach a lesson to these arrogant
Kauravas. The dishonoured Kauravas returned in haste to Hastin apura, with
Karna, who, having been driven of f the battlefield, joined them on the way .
Duryodhana, in great shame and dejection, felt it would have been far better
if he had been killed by Chitra sena and announced his wish to fast unto
death.
He said to Duhsasana: “Be crow ned and rule the kingdom. I can no longer
continue to live after having become a laughing- stock to my enemies.”Duhsasana protested his unwor thiness to be king and caught hold of his
brother ’s feet and wept. Karna  could not bear the sight of the brother's
sorrow .
Karna said: “This does not befit heroes of the Kuru race. What is the use of
just collapsing under sorrow? It will but make your enemies happy . Look at
the Pand avas. They have not taken to fasts in spite of the disgrace they have
suffered.”
Sakuni interposed and said: “Listen to Karna's words. Why do you say that
you would give up your life when the kingdom seized from the Pandavas is
yours to enjoy? Fasting serves no purpose, for if you really repent of what
you have done till now, you should make friends with the Pandavas and
give them back their kingdom.”
When Duryodhana heard this speech, his evil nature regained ascendancy ,
for giving back the kingdom to the Pandavas was to him a hundred times
worse than defeat or disgrace. He shouted: “I shall conquer the Pandavas.”
Karna said: “That is the way for a king to talk.”
And he added: “What sense is there in dying? You can do something
worthwhile only if you are alive.”
While returning  home, Karna said: “I swear to you by all that is holy that,
when the stipulated period of thirteen years is over, I will kill Arjuna in
battle.” And then he touched his sword in token of the oath.CHAPTER XL: SRI KRISHNA’S HUNGER
WHILE the Pandavas were dwelling in the forest, Duryodhana celebrated a
great sacrifice with much pomp  and splendour . He wanted to perform the
Rajasuya sacrifice, but the brahmanas told him that he could not do that
while Y udhishthira and Dhritarashtra were alive and advised him to perform
the sacrifice known as the Vaishnava instead. He accepted this advice and
celebrated the V aishnava with great splendour .
But when the ceremony was over, the citizens began to talk among
themselves that Duryodhana’ s sacrifice had not come up to even  a sixteenth
part of Yudhishthira’ s Rajasuya in magnificence. The friends of
Duryodhana, on the other hand, praised him and the sacrifice he had
celebrated and likened it to those performed by Yayati, Mandhata, Bharata
and others. Court sycophants were not sparing with their incense. Karna
told Duryodhana that his Rajsuya had been only postponed till the Pandavas
should be defea ted and slain in battle and repeated that his part would be
the slaying of Arjuna.
“Till I have slain Arjuna," said he. “I shall not take meat or wine, nor will I
refuse the prayer of anyone who asks me for anything.” Such was the
solemn vow taken by Karna in the assembly .
The sons of Dhritarashlra were delighted to hear this vow of the great hero
Karna and shouted in joy. They felt as if the Pandavas had been slain
already .
Spies conveyed to the Pandavas in the forest the news of the oath taken by
Karna. Yudhishthira was greatly  concerned, for he had a great opinion of
Karna’ s prowess. Karna had been born with divine armour and was
undoubtedly a mighty hero. One morning, just before the hour of
awakening, Yudhishthira had a dream. Many of our dreams come either in
the beginning or at the end of our sleep. He dreamt that the wild beasts of
the forest came and appealed to him piteously not to destroy them
altogether , but to move on to some other forest. They invoked his mercy
with tears and supplications. Much moved, he proceeded to another forest
with his brothers.Our ancestors were well awar e that wild life in the forest should be
conserved.
One day, the sage Durvasa went to Duryodhana with his ten thousand
disciples. Knowing the sage’ s temper , Duryodhana carefully attended
himself to all matters connected  with the reception of the guests and was so
lavish in his hospitality that the sage was gratified and told him to ask any
boon.
Duryodhana felt greatly relieved at having come so safely out of the ordeal
and when the sage asked him to seek a boon, it occurred to him that here
was an opportun ity of letting loose the irritable sage on the Pandavas, and
he said: “You have blessed us, great sage, by accepting our hospitality . Our
brothers are in the forest. Kindly deign to visit them also, so that they may
likewise be honoured and happy ,” and suggested for the visit a time when
he knew that all the food prepared would have been eaten and none would
be left for unexpected guests.
The sage, who liked always to test people, consented to do as Duryodhana
had requested.
Duryodhana felt sure that the Pandavas who themselves lived from hand to
mouth in the forest, would be unable to feed or entertain the sage and his
following, and would incur some dreadful curse from that too hasty visitor
for their want of hospitality . This would give him greater joy than any
benefit he could have asked for himself when the sage of fered a boon.
Durvasa went with his disciples to the Pandavas as was desired by
Duryodhana, as the latter were resting after their midday meal. The brothers
welcomed the sage, saluted and honoured him. Then the sage said: “We
shall be back soon. Our meals must be ready then, for we are hungry ,” and
hurried of f with his disciples to the river .
As a result of the austerities of Yudhishthira at the beginning of their stay in
the forest, the Sun god had given him the Akshayapatra, a wonderful vessel
which held a never -failing supply of food. In making the gift, the god had
said, “Through this I shall place at your disposal for twelve years as much
food as is required for your daily consumption. Not till everyone has beenserved and Draupadi herself has taken her share will the vessel become
empty for the day .”
Accordingly , the brahmanas and other guests would be served first.
Afterwards the Pandava brothers would take their meal. Finally , Draupadi
would have her share. When Durvasa reached the place, all of them,
including Draup adi, had eaten their meals and so the vessel was empty and
denuded of its power for the day .
Draupadi was greatly troubled and perfectly at a loss to find food when the
sage and his disciples should return after their ablutions. In the kitchen, she
prayed earnestly to Sri Krishna to come to her aid in this hopeless
predicament and deliver her from the wrath of the sage.
At once Sri Krishna appeared before her, “I am very hungry ,” he said,
“bring without delay something to eat and we shall speak of other things
afterwards.”
Here was a pretty pass. It looke d as though the ally from whom she hoped
for relief had gone over to the foe! She cried out in great confusion: “Alas!
Why do you try me thus, O Krishna? The power of the vessel given by the
Sun is exhausted  for the day. And the sage Durvasa has come. What shall I
do? The sage and his disciples will soon be here and as though this were not
enough, you have also come at this juncture saying that you are hungry .”
Sri Krishna said: “I am terribly hungry and want food, not excuses. Fetch
the vessel and let me see for myself."
Draupadi brought it to him. A tiny bit of cooked vegetable and a grain of
rice were sticking to the rim of the vessel. Sri Krishna ate them with
satisfaction, accepting them as Sri Hari, the Soul of the Universe.
Draupadi was filled with shame at her slovenliness in not having cleaned
the vessel free of all remnants. A bit had been left which had been partaken
by Vasudeva!
Sri Krishna seemed replete with satisfaction after eating his solitary grain
and calling Bhima, told him to go to the river and intimate to the revered
sage that food was ready and waiting for them.Bhimasena, greatly puzzled, but full of faith in Sri Krishna, hastened to the
river where Durvasa and his followers were bathing. They were in great
surprise to find that their ravenous hunger had given place to a pleased
satiety . They had all the comfortable cheerfulness of people who had
feasted well. The disciples told the sage: “We have come here after asking
Yudhishthira to prepare food for us, but we feel well-fed and full and cannot
eat anything more.” Durvasa knew what it was and he told Bhima: “We
have taken our meals. Tell Yudhishthira to forgive us.” Then the party went
away .
The explanation is that as the whole universe is contained in Sri Krishna,
his satisfaction with a single grain of rice satisfied for the time the hunger
of all beings including the sage.CHAPTER XLI: THE ENCHANTED POOL
THE stipulated period of twelve years was drawing to a close.
One day, a deer was rubbing itself against a poor brahmana’ s fire-kindling
mortar and as it turned to go, the mortar got entangled in its horns and the
affrighted animal fled wildly with it into the forest. In those days matches
were unknown and fire was kindled with pieces of wood by mechanical
friction.
“Alas! The deer is running away with my fire-kindler . How can I perform
the fire sacrifice ?” shouted the brahmana and rushed towards the Pandavas
for help in his extremity .
The Pandavas pursued the animal but it was a magic deer which sped in
great leaps and bounds, decoying the Pandavas far into the forest and then
disappeared. Worn out by the futile chase, the Pandavas sat in great
dejection under a banyan tree. Nakula sighed: “We cannot render even this
trifling service to the brahmana. How we have degenerated!" said he sadly .
Bhima said: “Quite so. When Draupadi was dragged into the assembly , we
should have killed those wretches. Is it not because we did not do so that we
have had to sufier all these sorrows?” and he looked at Arjuna sadly .
Arjuna agreed. “I bore in silence the vulgar and insulting brag of that son of
the chari oteer , doing nothing. So we have deservedly fallen into this pitiable
state.”
Yudhishthira noticed with sorrow that all of them had lost their cheerfulness
and courage. He thought they would be more cheerful with something to
do. He was torm ented with thirst and so he said to Nakula: “Brother , climb
that tree and see whether there is any pool or river nearby .”
Nakula climbed  the tree, looked around and said: “At a little distance I see
water plants and cranes. There must certainly be water there."
Yudhishthira sent him to fetch some to drink.
Nakula was glad when he got to the place and saw there was a pool. He was
very thirsty himself and so thought of quenching his thirst first beforetaking water in his quiver for his brother; but no sooner did he dip his hand
in the transparent water than he heard a voice which said:
“Do not be rash. This pool belongs to me. O son of Madri, answer my
questions and then drink the water .”
Nakula was surprised, but carried away by his intense thirst and heedless of
the warning, he drank the water. At once, overcome by irresistible
drowsiness, he fell down, to all appearance dead.
Surprised that Nakula had not returned, Yudhishthira sent Sahadeva to see
what the matter was. When Sahadeva reached the pool and saw his brother
lying on the ground, he wonder ed whether any harm had come to him, but
before looking into the matter further , rushed irresistibly to the water to
quench his burning thirst.
The voice was heard again: “O Sahadeva, this is my pool. Answer my
questions and then only may you quench your thirst.”
Like Nakula, Sahadeva also did not heed the warning. He drank the water
and at once dropped down.
Puzzled and worried that Sahad eva also did not return. Yudhishthira sent
Arjuna to see whether the brothers had met with any danger . “And bring
water ,” he added, for he was very thirsty .
Arjuna went swiftly . He saw both his brothers lying dead near the pool. He
was shocked at the sight and felt that they must have been killed by some
lurking foe. Though heartbroken with grief and burning with the desire for
revenge, he felt all feelings else submer ged in a monstrous thirst which
irresistibly impelled him to the fatal pool. Again, a voice was heard:
‘Answer my question before you drink the water . This pool is mine. If you
disobey me, you follow , your brothers.”
Arjuna’ s anger knew no bounds. He cried: “Who are you? Come and stand
up to me, and I will kill you,” and he shot keen-edged arrows in the
direction of the voice. The invisible being laughed in scorn: “Your arrows
do but wound the air. Answer my questions and then you can satisfy your
thirst. If you drink the water without doing so, you will die."Greatly vexed, Arjuna made up his mind to seek out and grapple with this
elusive foe, but first he must quench his terrible thirst. Yes, thirst was the
enemy he must kill first. So he drank the water and also fell down dead.
After anxious waiting Yudhishth ira turned to Bhima: “Dear brother, Arjuna,
the great hero, has also not yet returned. Something terrible must have
happened to our brothers, for our stars are bad. Please seek them out and be
quick about it. Also bring wate r, for I die of thirst.” Bhima, racked with
anxiety , hurried away without a word.
His grief and rage can be imag ined when he saw his three brothers lying
there dead. He thought: “This is certainly the work of the yakshas. I will
hunt them down and kill them, but I am so thirsty , I shall first drink water
the better to fight them.” And then he descended into the pool.
The voice shouted: “Bhimase na, beware. You may drink only after
answering my questions. Y ou will die if you disregard my words.”
“Who are you to dictate to me?” cried Bhima, and he drank the water
avidly , glaring around in defia nce. And as he did so, his great strength
seemed to slip from him like a garment, and he also fell dead among his
brothers.
Lone, Yudhishthira wailed in a hell of anxiety and thirst. “Have they been
subjected to a curse or are they wandering about in the forest in vain search
for water or have they fainted or died of thirst?” Unable to bear these
thoughts, and driven desperate by an overpowering thirst, he started out to
look for his brothers and the pool.
Yudhishthira proceeded in the direction his brothers had taken through
tracts infested with wild boar and abounding in spotted dear and huge forest
birds, and presen tly came upon a beautiful green meadow , girdling a pool of
pellucid water , nectar to his eyes. But when he saw his brothers lying there
like sacred flagpoles thrown pell-mell after a festival, unable to restrain his
grief, he lifted his voice and wept.
He stroked the faces of Bhima  and Arjuna as they lay so still and silent
there and mourned: “Was this to be the end of all our vows? Just when our
exile is about to end, you have been snatched away . Even the gods have
forsaken me in my misfortune!”As he looked at their mighty limbs, now so helpless, he sadly wondered
who could have been powerful enough to kill them. Brokenly , he reflected:
“Surely my heart must be made of steel not to break even after seeing
Nakula and Sahadeva lie dead. For what purpose should I continue to live
in this world? Then a sense of mystery overcame him, for this could be no
ordinary occurrence. The world held no warriors who could overcome his
brothers; beside s, there were no wounds on their bodies which  could have
let out life and their faces were faces of men who slept in peace and not of
those who died in wrath. There  was also no trace of the footprints of an
enemy . There was surely some magic about it. Or, could it be a trick played
by Dury odhana? Might he not have poisoned the water? Then Yudhishthira
also descended into the pool, in his turn drawn to the water by a consuming
thirst. At once the voice without form warned as before:
“Your brothers died because they did not heed my words. Do not follow
them. Answer my questions first and then quench your thirst. This pool is
mine.”
Yudhishthira knew that these could be none other than the words of a
yaksha and guessed what had happened to his brothers. He saw a possible
way of redeeming the situation. He said to the bodiless voice: “Please ask
your questions.”
The voice put questions rapidly one after another .
It asked: “What makes sun shine every day?”
Yudhishthira replied: “The power of Brahman.”
“What rescues man in danger?”
“Courage is man’ s salvation in danger .”
“By the study of which science does man become wise?”
“Not by studying any sastra does man become wise. It is by association
with the great in wisdom that he gets wisdom.”
The yaksha asked: “What is more nobly sustaining than the earth?”
Yudhishthira replied: “The mother who brings up the children she has borne
is nobler and more sustaining than the earth.”“What is higher than the sky?”
“The father .”
“What is fleeter than wind?”
“Mind.”
“What is more blighted than withered straw?"
“A sorrow-stricken heart.”
“What befriends a traveller?”
“Learning.”
“Who is the friend of one who stays at home? ”
“The wife.”
“Who accompanies a man in death?”
“Dharma. That alone accompa nies the soul in its solitary journey after
death.”
“Which is the biggest vessel?”
“The earth, which contains all within itself is the greatest vessel.”
“What is happiness?”
“Happiness is the result of good conduct.”
“What is that, abandoning which man becomes loved by all?”
“Pride-for abandoning that man will be loved by all.”
“What is the loss which yields joy and not sorrow?”
“Anger -giving it up, we will no longer be subject to sorrow ."
“What is that, by giving up which, man becomes rich?"
“Desire-getting rid of it, man becomes wealthy .”
“What makes one a real brahmana? Is it birth, good conduct or learning?
Answer decisively .”“Birth and learning do not make one a brahmana. Good conduct alone does.
However learned a person may be he will not be a brahmana if he is a slave
to bad habits. Even though he may be learned in the four Vedas, a man of
bad conduct falls to a lower class.”
“What is the greatest wonder in the world?”
“Every day, men see creatures depart to Yama’ s abode and yet, those who
remain, seek to live for ever . This verily is the greatest wonder .”
Thus, the yaksha posed many questions and Yudhishthira answered them
all.
In the end the yaksha asked: “O king, one of your dead brothers  can now be
revived. Whom do you want revived? He shall come back to life.”
Yudhishthira thought for a moment and then replied: “May the cloud-
complexioned, lotus-eyed, broad -chested and long-armed Nakula, lying like
a fallen ebony tree, arise."
The yaksha was pleased at this and asked Yudhishthira: “Why did you
choose Nakula in preference to Bhima who has the strength  of sixteen
thousand elepha nts? I have heard that Bhima is most dear to you. And why
not Arjuna, whose prowess in arms is your protection? Tell me why you
chose Nakula rather than either of these two.”
Yudhishthira replied: “O yaksha, dharma is the only shield of man and not
Bhima or Arjuna. If dharma is set at naught, man will be mined . Kunti and
Madri were the two wives of my father . I am surviving, a son of Kunti, and
so, she is not completely bereav ed. In order that the scales of justice may be
even, I ask that Madri’ s son Nakula may revive."
The yaksha was pleased with Yudhishthira’ s impartiality and granted that
all his brothers would come back to life.
It was Yama, the Lord of Death, who had taken the form of the deer and the
yaksha so that he might see his son Yudhishthira and test him. He embraced
Yudhishthira and blessed him.
Yama said: “Only a few days remain to complete the stipulate d period of
your exile in the forest. The thirteenth year will also pass by. None of yourenemies will be able to discov er you. You will successfully fulfil your
undertaking,” and saying this he disappeared.
The Pandavas had, no doubt, to pass through all sorts of troubles during
their exile, but the gains too were not inconsiderable. It was a period of hard
discipline and searching probation through which they emer ged stronger
and nobler men. Arjuna return ed from tapas with divine weapons and
strengthened by contact with Indra. Bhima also met his elder brother
Hanuman near the lake where the Saugandhika flowers bloom ed and got
tenfold strength from his embrace. Having met, at the enchant ed pool, his
father Y ama, the Lord of Dharma, Y udhishthira shone with tenfold lustre.
“The minds of those who listen to the sacred story of Yudhishthira’ s
meeting with his father , will never go after evil. They will never seek to
create quarrels among friends or covet the wealth of others. They will never
fall victims to lust. They will never be unduly attached to transitory things.”
Thus said Vaisampayana to Janamejaya as he related this story of the
yaksha. May the same good attend the readers of this story as retold by us.CHAPTER XLII: DOMESTIC SERVICE
“O BRA HMANAS, we have been deceived by the sons of Dhritarashtra,
cheated out of our kingdom and reduced to poverty . Still we have passed
these years cheerfully with joy in the forest. The thirteenth year of exile has
come, and with it the time for us to part from you, for we have to spend the
next twelve months undiscovered by the spies of Duryodhana. God knows
when the day will dawn which will see us together again, without fear or
concealment. Now , bless us before we go, and may we escape the notice of
those who may wish to betray us to the sons of Dhritarashtra, either through
fear or hope of reward.” So spoke Yudhishthira to the brahmanas who were
living with the Pandavas till then. His voice shook with emotion as he
spoke these words.
Dhaumya consoled him. He said: “Parting is hard, and the dangers are
many and great, but you are too wise and learned to be shaken or daunted.
You must disgui se yourselves. Indra, the Lord of gods, when pested by the
demons, disguis ed himself as a brahmana and lived unknown in the country
of Nishadha. Safely concealed thus, he managed to destroy his enemies.
You must also do likewise. Did not Mahavishnu, the Lord of the Universe,
become a child in the womb of Aditi, suffer human birth, and take away
from Emperor Bali his kingdom for the salvation of the world? Did not
Lord Narayana, the refuge of men, enter into the weapon of Indra to defeat
Vritra, the asura king? Did not the Fire god hide himself in the waters for
the sake of the gods? Does not the sun go out of sight every day? Did not
Lord Vishnu, the All- pervading God, descend as the son of Dasaratha and
spend long years, suffering many sorrows for the sake of killing Ravana?
The greatest souls in the past have sanctified disguise for a good purpose.
You will, likewise, conquer your enemies and win prosperity .”
Yudhishthira took leave of the brahmanas and gave the mem bers of his
retinue leave to go home. The Pandavas retired to a secluded spot in the
forest and discussed their futur e line of action. Yudhishthira sadly asked
Arjuna: “You are well conversan t with the ways of the world. Where would
it be best for us to spend the thirteenth year?”Arjuna replied: “O great king, you know Yama, the Lord of Death, has
blessed us. We can easily pass the twelve months together without being
discovered. There are many charming states for us to choose from for our
sojourn states like Panchala, Matsya, Salva, Videha, Bahlika, Dasharna,
Surasena, Kalinga and Magadha . It is, of course, for you to choose, but if I
may venture an opinion, the Matsya country of king Virata is the best,
prosperous and charming as it is."
Yudhishthira answered: “Virata, the king of Matsya, is very strong and he
loves us much. He is of mature judgment and is devoted to the practice of
virtue. He will not be won over or frightened by Duryodhana. I agree that it
would be best to live incognito in V irata’ s kingdom."
Arjuna said: “Well then. O king, what work would you seek in the court of
Virata?”
When he asked this question, Arjuna was full of sorrow at the thought of
Yudhishthira, the great and guileless king, who had performed the Rajasuya
sacrifice, having to disguise himself and take service.
Yudhishthira answered: “I am thinking of asking Virata to take me in his
service as a courtier. I could delight him with my conversation and my
dexterity at dice. I shall take the garb of a sanyasin and shall keep him
agreeably engaged by my skill in reading omens and knowledge of
astrology as well as of the Vedas, Vedangas, ethics , politics and other
sciences. I shall have to be caref ul of course, but be not anxious about me. I
shall tell him that I was an intim ate friend of Yudhishthira and learnt these
things while I was privileged to be with him. O Bhima, what work will you,
who conquered and slew Baka and Hidimba, take up under Virata? You
saved us by killing Jatasura. Valour and strength are over-flowin g from you.
What disguise can hide your mighty personality and enable you to live
unknown in the country of Mastya?” Y udhishthira was in tears as he put this
question to Bhima.
Bhima laughingly replied: “O king, I think of taking service as a cook in the
court of Virata. You know that I have a great appetite and that I am also an
expert in cooking. I shall please  Virata by preparing such dainty  food as he
has never tasted. I shall hew the trees of the forest and bring heaps of fuel. Ishall also delight the king by contending with and defeating the wrestlers
who come to his court.
This made Yudhishthira anxious for he feared that danger might befall them
if Bhima engaged himself in wrestling bouts. At once Bhima spoke thus to
calm his fears:
“I shall not kill anyone. I may give a bad jolt to any wrestler who deserves
it but I shall not kill anyone. I shall restrain mad bulls, buffaloe s and other
wild animals and thus entertain king V irata.”
Afterwards Yudhishthira addre ssed Arjuna: “What profession do you
propose to take up? How can you hide your towering valour?” When he
asked this question Yudhishthir a could not restrain himself from narrating
the brilliant exploits of Arjuna. He spoke of his brother ’s glory in twenty
verses. W ell, who deserves praise if not Arjuna?
Arjuna replied: “Revered brother , I shall hide myself in the guise of a
eunuch and serve the ladies of the court. I shall hide under a jacket the scars
on my arms made by the constant chafing of the bow-string. When I
rejected Urvasi’ s amorous overtures on the ground that she was like a
mother unto me, she cursed me with loss of manhood; but through Indra’ s
grace the curse would hold good only for a year, and the time would be
mine to choose. I shall serve out that year of loss of manhood now. Wearing
bangles made of white conchs, braiding my hair like a woman, and clothing
myself in female attire, I shall engage myself in menial work in the inner
apartments of Virata’ s queen. I shall teach the women singing and dancing.
And I shall seek service saying that I used to serve Draupadi in
Yudhishthira’ s court.” Saying this, Arjuna turned to Draupadi and smiled.
Yudhishthira was in tears. “Alas! Have the fates decreed that he, who is the
equal of Sri Krishna himself in fame and valour , a scion of Bharata’ s line,
who stands high like the great golden mount Meru, must go and seek
employment of Virata as a eunuch in the queen’ s inner apartments?" he said
brokenly .
Yudhishthira then turned to Nakula and asked him what work he would
engage in and, as he thought of Madri, the mother of Nakula, tears rolled
down his eyes.Nakula replied: “I shall work in King Virata’ s stables. My mind delights in
training and looking after horses, for I know the heart of horses and have
knowledge of their ailments and cure. I can not only ride and break horses
but also harness and drive them  in a chariot. I shall say that I had looked
after the horses of the Pandavas  and I have no doubt Virata will take me in
his service.”
Yudhishthira asked Sahadeva: “You, with the intelligence of Brihaspati, the
priest and the preceptor of the gods, and the knowledge of Sukra, the
teacher of the asuras, what work will you take up? ”
Sahadeva replie d: “Let Nakula look after horses. I shall tend the cows. I
shall guard Virata’s cattle from the ravages of disease and the attacks of
wild beasts.”
“O Draupadi,” - but Yudhishthir a could not find words to ask her what she
proposed to do. She was dearer to him than life itself, worthy of all
reverence and protection, - and it seemed sacrilege to talk of service. She
was a princess,  the daughter of a king, nobly born, tenderly nurtured.
Yudhishthira felt choked by shame and despair .
Draupadi saw his grief and spoke these brave words:
“O best of kings, do not grieve or suffer anxiety on my account. I shall be a
Sairandhri  in the court of the queen of Virata-the companion and attendant
of the princess. I shall preserve my freedom and chastity , for the attendant
and companion of a princess has this right and can exercise it. I shall pass
my days in such light tasks as braiding the hair and entertaining  the women
of the court with small talk. I shall represent that I had thus served princess
Draupadi in Yudhishthira’ s court and seek employment from the queen.
Thus shall I remain unknown to others.”
Yudhishthira praised Draupadi’ s courage and said: “O auspicious one, you
speak as befits one of your family .”
When the Pandavas thus decided, Dhaumya blessed them and advised them
thus: “Those who are engaged in service under a king should always be
vigilant. They must serve without talking too much. They may give their
counsel only when asked, and never obtrude it. They should praise the king
on be- fitting occasions. All things, no matter how small, may be done onlyafter informing the king, who is a veritable fire in human form. Do not go
too near him, nor yet appear to avoid him. Even though a person may be
trusted by the king and have great authority , still he should always behave
as if he would be dismissed imme diately . It would be foolishness to place
too much confidence in a king. One may not sit in the conveyance, seat or
chariot of the king, presuming on his affection. A servant of the king should
ever be active and self-restrained. He should not be excessively  elated, nor
unduly depressed, by being honoured or dishonoured by the king.
“He may not reveal the secrets confided to him nor may he recei ve anything
in the form of gift from the citizens. He should not be jealous of other
servants. The king may place fools in positions of authority , leaving aside
the wise. Such way- wardness should be ignored. One cannot be too careful
with the ladies of the court. There should not be the faintest suggestion of
indelicacy in one’s conduct towards them." Dhaumya then blessed the
Pandavas: “Live  thus in patienc e for one year, serving the king Virata, and
then, you will pass the rest of your days in happiness, regaining your lost
throne.”CHAPTER XLIII: VIRTUE VINDICATED
YUDHISHTHIRA put on the garb of a sanyasin. Arjuna transformed
himself into a eunuch. Others also disguised themselves but no disguise
could take away  their natural charm, grace and nobility of mien . When they
went to King Virata seeking service, they seemed to him born to command
and rule rather than to serve, and he hesitated, at first, to engage them in
service but yielding to their urgent solicitations, he finally appointed them
to the places they sought of him.
Yudhishthira became the king’ s companion and spent his days in playing
dice with him. Bhima worked as the chief of the cooks. He also entertained
the king by wrestling with the reputed men of might who came to the court,
and by controlling wild animals.
Arjuna assumed  the name of Brihannala and taught dancing, singing and
instrumental music to Princess Uttara, the daughter of V irata, and the ladies.
Nakula looked after the horses and Sahadeva looked after the cows and the
bulls.
The princess Draupadi who, if fate had been less cruel, should herself have
been served by many maids, had now to pass her days in serving Sudeshna,
Virata’ s queen. She lived in the inner apartments of the palace as maid and
companion, engaging herself in uncongenial tasks.
Kichaka, the brother of Sudeshna, was the commander -in chief of Virata’ s
army and it was to him that the old king Virata owed his power and
prestige, Kichaka wielded such vast influence that people used to say that
Kichaka was the real king of the Matsya country and old Virata king only in
name.
Kichaka was inordinately vain of his strength and his influen ce over the
king. He was so smitten with Draupadi’ s beauty that he conceived an
uncontrollable passion for her and he was so sure of his own attractions and
power that it never occurred to him that she, though a mere maid-servant,
could resist his will. He made amorous overtures to her which greatly vexed
her.Draupadi was too shy to speak of this to Sudeshna or to other s. She gave
out that her husbands were gandharvas who would mysteriously kill those
who tried to dishonour her. Her good conduct and lustre made everyone
believe in her story about the gandharvas, but Kichaka was not to be
frightened so easily and he sought persistently to seduce Draupadi. His
persecution became so intolerable that at last she complained of it to Queen
Sudeshna, and implored her protection.
Kichaka, of course, had greater influence over his sister , and he shamelessly
confided to her his unlawful passion for her maid and sought her aid to
compass his wish. He represented himself as dying of desire. “I am so full
of torment,” he said, “that from the time I met your maid, I do not get any
sleep or rest. You must save my life by managing somehow to make her
receive my advances favourably .”
The queen tried to dissuade him but Kichaka would not listen: and finally
Sudeshna yielded. Both of them decided upon a plan to entrap Draupadi.
One night, many sweetmeats and intoxicating drinks were prepared in the
house of Kichaka and a great feast was arranged. Sudeshna called
Sairandhri to her side and handing her a beautiful golden jug bade her go
and bring her a jug of wine from Kichaka’ s house.
Draupadi hesitated to go to the house of the infatuated Kichaka  at that hour
and begged hard that someone else of her many attendants might be sent,
but Sudeshna did not listen but pretended to be angry and said sharply: “Go,
you must. I cannot send anyone else,” and poor Draupadi had to obey .
Draupadi’ s fears were justified . When she reached Kichaka’ s house, that
wretch, maddened with lust and wine, began to pester her with urgent
entreaties and solicitations.
She rejected his prayers and said: “Why do you, who belong to a noble
royal family, seek me, born of a low caste? Why do you take to the wrong
path? Why do you approach me, a married lady? You will perish. My
protectors, the gandharvas, will kill you in their anger .”
When Draupadi would not yield to his entreaties, Kichaka seize d her by the
arm and pulled her about but putting down the vessel she carried, she
wrenched hersel f free and fled, hotly pursued by the maddene d Kichaka.She fled to the court wailing loudly, but even there, intoxicated not only
with wine, but even more by his power and influence, Kichaka followed her
and kicked her in the presence of all with abusive words. Everyone was
afraid of the all-powerful commander -in-chief and no one was bold enough
to oppose him.
Draupadi could not bear the sorrow and anger she felt at the thought of her
helplessness under the intolerable insult offered to her. Her deep distress
made her forget the danger that would befall the Pandavas if they were
discovered prematurely . She went that night to Bhima and waking him up,
gave vent to her agonised sense of wrong. After telling him how brutally
Kichaka had pursued and insulted her, she appealed piteously to Bhima for
protection and revenge. She said in a voice choked with sobs:
“I cannot bear this any longer . You must kill this wretch at once. For your
sake, to help you keep your promise, I serve in a menial office and even
prepare sandal paste for Virata.  I have not minded it-I, who have till now
served only you or Mother Kunti, whom I love and honour . But now, I have
to serve these wretches, fearful every moment of some disgraceful outrage.
Not that I mind  hard work-see my hands.” And she showed her hands
which were cracked and stain ed with menial tasks. Bhima respectfully
carried her hands to his face and eyes-and speechless with sorrow and pity
and love, he dried her tears. Finally he found his voice, and said thickly:
“I care not for the promise of Yudhishthira or the advice of Arjuna; I care
not what may happen but I will do as you say. I will kill Kichaka and his
gang here and now!” and he rose.
But Draupadi warned Bhima not to be hasty . They talked it over and finally
decided that Kichaka should be beguiled to come alone at night  to a retired
spot in the dancing hall where he should find waiting for him Bhima
disguised as a woman, instead of Draupadi.
Next morning, Kichaka renewed his hateful attentions and vain-gloriously
said to Draupad i: “O Sairandhri, I threw you down and kicked you in the
presence of the king. Did any one there come forward to help you? Virata is
only king in name of this Matsya country , but I, the command er-in-chief,
am the real sovereign. Now , do not be a fool, but come and enjoy life withme, with all royal honours. I shall be your devoted servant.” And he begged
and bullied and cringed, devouring her the while with lust-reddened eyes.
Draupadi preten ded to yield and said: “Kichaka, believe me, I can no longer
resist your solicitations. But none of your companions or brothers should
know of our relations. If you swear that you will faithfully keep the secret
from others, I shall yield to your wish."
Kichaka delighte dly agreed to the condition and he promised to go alone to
a place of assignation that very night.
She said: “The women have their dancing lessons during daytime in the
dancing hall and return to their own quarters at nightfall. None will be in
the dancing hall at night. Come there tonight. I shall be waiting for you
there. Y ou can have your will of me.”
Kichaka revelled in happiness.
That night, Kichaka took his bath, perfumed and decked himself, went to
the dancing hall and finding with joy that the doors were open, gently
entered the place.
In the very dim light, he saw someone lying there on a couc h, no doubt
Sairandhri. He groped his way in the dark, and gently laid his hands on the
person of the sleeper . Alas! It was not the soft form of Sairandhri that he
touched but the iron frame of Bhima who leapt forth on him like a lion on
its prey and hurled him to the ground. But surprised as he was, Kichaka was
no cowa rd, and he was now fighting for dear life. Grimly they wrestled,
Kichaka no doubt thinking he had to do with one of the gandharva
husbands. They were not ill- matched, for at that time Bhima, Balarama and
Kichaka were reputed to be in the same class in strength and wrestling skill.
The struggle between Bhima and Kichaka was like that betwe en Vali and
Sugriva.
In the end Bhima killed Kichaka, pounding and kneading his body into a
shapeless lump of flesh. Then he gave the glad news of Kichaka’ s
punishment to Draupadi and went in haste to his kitchen, bathed, rubbed
sandal paste over his body and slept with satisfaction.Draupadi woke the guards of the court and said to them: “Kichaka came to
molest me, but as I had warned  him, the gandharvas, my husb ands, made
short work of him. Your commander -in-chief, who fell a prey to lust, has
been killed. Look at him.” And she showed them the corpse of Kichaka
which had been reduced to such a shapeless mass that it had no human
semblance.CHAPTER XLIV: MATSYA DEFENDED
THE fate of Kichaka made Draupadi an object of fear to the people of
Virata. “This woman, so beautiful that she captures all hearts, is as
dangerous as she is lovely , for the gandharvas guard her. She is a great
danger to the people of the city and the members of the royal household, for
the gand harvas may stop at nothing in their jealous anger . It would be best
to send her out of the city.” Reflecting thus, the citizens went to Sudeshna
and prayed to her to expel Draupadi.
Sudeshna told Draupadi: “You are, no doubt, a very virtuous lady, but
kindly leave our city . I have had enough of you.”
There was only one month more to complete the stipulated period of living
incognito and Draupadi begge d earnestly to be permitted to stay just
another month by when, she said, her gandharva husbands would have
realised their objects and would  be ready to take her away with them. The
gandharvas would be very grateful to King Virata and his kingdom.
Whether grateful or not, the gandharvas could be deadly if irritated and
Sudeshna was too afraid of Draupadi to refuse her request.
From the beginning of the thirteenth year, the spies of Duryodhana, under
his express orders, had searched  for the Pandavas in all possible places of
hiding. After several months of futile search, they reported their failure to
Duryodhana and added that probably the Pandavas had perished of
privations. Then came the news that the powerful Kichaka had been killed
in single  comba t by some gand harva on account of a woman. There were
only two persons who could kill Kichaka, and Bhima was one of them, and
so they suspected that Bhima might have been the vengeful gandharva who
had killed Kich aka; and Duryodhana also felt that the lady who was the
cause of the killing might be Draupadi. He expressed his doubts in the open
assembly .
He said: “I suspect that the Pandavas are in Virata’ s city. Now , he is one of
the kings who is too stiff-necked  to court our friendship, It would be a good
thing to invade his country and carry away his cows. If the Pandavas are
hiding there, they will certainly come out to fight with us to repay Virata’ shospitality and we can surely spot them. If we discover them before the
stipulated time, they will have to go to the forest again for another twelve
years. If, on the other hand, the Pandavas are not there, there is nothing
lost.”
King Susarma, the ruler of Trigarta, heartily supported him. “The king of
Matsya is my enemy,” he said, “and Kichaka has given me a lot of trouble.
Kichaka’ s death must have weakened Virata considerably . Give me leave to
attack V irata now .”
Karna seconded this propositio n. They unanimously came to the decision
that Susarma should attack Mats ya from the south and draw off the army of
Virata to the south for defence. Duryodhana, with the Kaurava army, would
then launch a surprise attack on Virata from the northern side which would
be relatively undefended.
Susarma invaded  Matsya from the south, seized the cattle and laid waste the
gardens and fields on the way. The cowherds ran in great distress to Virata,
who now very much wished that Kichaka was alive, for he surely would
have made short work of the raiders. When he said so to Kanka (the
assumed name by which Yudhishthira was known in Virata’ s court) the
latter said: “O king, be not worried. Even though I am a hermit, I am an
expert in warfare. I shall put on armour and go in a chariot and drive away
your enemies. Please instruct that your cook Valala, your stable-keeper
Dharmagranthi and your cow-he rd Tantripala may also get into chariots and
help us. I have heard that they are great fighters. Kindly give orders that the
necessary chariots and the weapons may be given to us.”
Delighted, Virata was only too willing to accept the offer. The chariots were
ready . All the Pandavas excepting Arjuna went out with the army of Virata
to oppose Susarma and his men. A fierce fight ensued between the armies
of Virata and Susarma, with much loss of life on both sides. Susarma
attacked Virata and surrounded his chariot, compelling him to get down and
fight on foot. Susarma captured  Virata and held him captive in his chariot.
With the capture of Virata, the army of Matsya lost heart and began to
scatter in all directions, when Yudhishthira commanded Bhim a to attack
Susarma and release V irata and rally the scattered Matsya forces.At these words of Yudhishthir a, Bhima was about to uproot  a tree, but
Yudhishthira stopped him and said: “No such tricks, please, and no battle
cry-or your identity will be revealed. Fight like anybody else from the
chariot with your bows and arrows.”
Bhima accordingly got into the chariot, attacked the enemy , set Virata free
and captured Susarma. The dispersed forces of Matsya rallied into new
formations, char ged and defeated the army of Susarma.
As soon as the news of Susarma’ s defeat reached the city, the people were
extremely jubilant. They decora ted the city and went forth to welcome their
victorious king back home.
When they were thus making preparations to receive king Virata, the big
army of Duryodhana came down on them from the north, and began
despoiling the cattle ranches on the out- skirts of the city. The Kaurava
army marched in force and rounded up the countless cows that were there.
The leader of the cowherds ran to the city and said to the prince  Uttara: “O
prince, the Kauravas are marching on, robbing us of our cows. King Virata
has gone  south to fight against the Trigarta. We are in consternation as there
is no one to protect us. You are the king’ s son and we look to you for
protection. Pray , come and recover the cows for the honour of your family .”
When the leader of the cowherds made this complaint to Uttara in the
presence of the people and especially of the women of the palace, the prince
felt flushed with valour and proudly said: “If only I can get someone to be
my charioteer I will recover the cows single-handed. Well, my feats of arms
will be worth seeing-and people  will know there is little to choo se between
Arjuna and myself.”
When Uttara said these words Draupadi was in the inner apartments and
must have laugh ed within herself. She ran to princess Uttara and said: “O
princess, great danger has befallen the country . The cowherds have
complained to the young prince that the Kaurava army is advancing on our
city from the north and has captured cattle ranches and cows on the
outskirts. The prince is eager to fight them and is in need of a charioteer .
Should such a small thing as that stand in the way of victory and glory? I
tell you what. Brihannala has been Arjuna’ s charioteer . When I was in theservice of the queen of the Pandavas, I heard of this fact and I also know
that Brihannala learnt archery from Arjuna. Order Brihannala immediately
to go and drive the prince’ s chariot.”
The princess ran to her brother and said: “I learn from Sairandhri who has
served in the Pandava court, that Brihannala is an expert charioteer and has
actually been a charioteer to Arjuna, the Pandava hero. Take him, go forth
to save us and cover yourself with glory .”
The prince agreed and at once the princess ran to the dancing hall and
informed Brihannala (Arjuna in disguise) that her services were required as
charioteer .
She said: “The Kauravas are going away with the wealth and the cows of
my father. These wicked men have come, taking advantage of the king’ s
absence. Sairandhri says that you have been Arjuna’ s charioteer and have
acquired dexterity in warfare. Go and drive the prince’ s chariot-be not
afraid, the prince will protect you!”
Hiding a smile and with a prope r show of hesitation and diffidence, Arjuna
assented. He also pretended to be unfamiliar with armour and raised a laugh
at his awkwardness in wearing it. The women of the palace laughed at his
fears and told him again not to be afraid for Uttara would look after him.
Arjuna spent some time in such fun but, when he harnessed the horses, it
could be seen that, at least, he was an expert charioteer , and when he held
the reins, the horses seemed to love and obey him.
“The prince will be victorious. We shall despoil the enem y of their
embroidered robes and distribute them to you as the prize of victory” were
the last words of Brihannala to the women of the palace, as the chariot
rapidly bore the prince outwards to battle.CHAPTER XLV: PRINCE UTTARA
UTTARA, the son of Virata, set out with enthusiasm from the city in his
chariot with Brihannala as his charioteer and commanded the latter to drive
quickly to the place where the Kauravas had rounded up the cows.
Nothing loth, the horses were put to their best speed, and presently the
Kaurava army was sighted, at first a gleaming line, enveloped in a cloud of
dust that seemed to go up to the skies. Going nearer , Uttara saw the great
army drawn in battle by Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Duryodhana and Karna. At
that sight, his courage, which had been gradually drying up during the rapid
rush to the field, was quite gone; his mouth went dry and his hair stood on
end. His limbs were all in a tremble. He shut his eyes with both his hands to
keep out the fearsome sight.
He said:  “How can I, single-han ded, attack an army? I have no troops, since
the king, my father , has taken all available forces, leaving the city
unprotected. It is absurd to think that one man can alone fight a well-
equipped army , led by world-renowned warrior! Oh Brihannala, turn back
the chariot.”
Brihannala laughed and said: “O prince, you started from the city, full of
fierce determina tion and the ladies expect great things of you. The citizens
also have put their trust in you. Sairandhri praised me and I have come at
your request. If we return without recovering the cows, we shall become the
laughing-stock of all. I will not turn back the chariot. Let us stand firm and
fight. Have no fear .” With these words Brihannala began to drive the chariot
towards the enemy and they approached quite close to them. Uttara’ s
distress was pitiable. He said in a quaking voice: “I cannot do it, I simply
cannot. Let the Kauravas march off with the cows and if the women laugh,
let them; I do not care. What sense is there in fighting people who are
immeasurably stronger than we? Do not be a fool! Turn back the chariot.
Otherwise, I shall jump out and walk back.” With these words Urtara cast
off his bows and arrows, got down from the chariot and began to fly
towards the city , mad with panic.This should not be taken as something that has never happened  in life, nor
is Uttara’ s panic during his first battle, by any means, singula r. Fear is a
strong instinctive feeling, though it can be overcome by will-power or
strong motives like love, shame or hate, or more usually , by discipline.
Even men who have afterwards distinguished themselves by heroic deeds
have confessed to having felt something like panic fear, the first time they
came under fire. Uttara was by no means an exceptional coward, for he
fought and fell gallantly at Kurukshetra.
Arjuna pursued the running prince, shouting to him to stop and behave like
a kshatriya. The braided hair of the charioteer began to dance and his
clothes began to wave as he ran in pursuit of Uttara. The prince  fled hither
and thither , trying to dodge the hands that would stop him. Those of the
Kaurava army , who could see this spectacle found it amusing.
Drona was puzzled at the sight of Brihannala who, albeit dressed
fantastically , seemed a man rigged out as a woman and to remind him
curiously of Arjuna. When he remarked about this, Karna said: “How can
this be Arjuna? What does it matter even if he is? What can Arjuna alone do
against us in the absence of the other Pandavas? The king has left his son
alone in the city and gone with his whole army to fight against Susarma.
The young prince has brought the attendant of the ladies of the palace as his
charioteer . That is all.”
Poor Uttara was imploring Brihannala to let him go, promising untold
wealth if he did so. He appealed to his pity: “I am the only son of my
mother . I am a child grown up on my mother ’s lap. I am full of fear .”
But, Brihannala wanted to save him from himself and would not let him go.
He pursued him, seized him and dragged him to the chariot by force.
Uttara began to sob and said: “What a fool I was to brag! Alas! What will
happen to me?”
Arjuna said kindly soothing the prince’ s fears: “Be not afraid. I shall fight
with the Kauravas. Help me by looking after the horses and driving the
chariot and I shall do the rest. Believe me, no good ever came of flight. We
will rout the enemy and recover your cows. You will have all the glory ."With these words Arjuna lifted the prince on to the chariot and, putting the
reins in his hands, asked him to drive towards a tree near the burial ground.
Drona who was watching all this intently , knew that the fantastically-
dressed charioteer was Arjuna and shared his knowledge with Bhishma.
Duryodhana turned to Karna and said: “Why should we worry who he is?
Even if he is Arjuna, he will be only playing into our hands, for his being
discovered will send the Pandavas to the forest for another twelve years.”
As soon  as they came near the tree Brihannala bade the princ e get down,
climb the tree and take down the arms hidden there.
The prince said in alarm and grief: “People say that what hangs  on this tree
is the corpse of an old huntress . How can I touch a dead body? How can
you ask me to do such a thing?”
Arjuna said: “It is not a corpse, prince: I know that it contains the weapons
of the Pandavas . Climb up the tree bravely and bring them down. Do not
delay .”
Seeing that resistance was of no avail Uttara climbed up the tree as
Brihannala had asked him to and took, in great disgust, the bag tied up there
and came down . When the leather bag was opened, he saw weapons as
bright as the sun.
Uttara stood amazed at the sight of the gleaming weapons and covered his
eyes. He muster ed courage and touched them. The touch seeme d to send a
stream of hope and high courage into him.
He asked with ardour: “O charioteer , what a wonder! Y ou say that these
bows, arrows and swords belong to the Pandavas. They have been deprived
of their kingdom and they have retired to the forest. Do you know them?
Where are they?”
Then Arjuna told him briefly how they were all in Virata’ s court. He said:
“Kanka, who serves the king, is Yudhishthira. Valala, the cook who
prepares such nice dishes for your father , is none other than Bhima.
Sairandhri, for insulting whom Kichaka was killed, is Draupadi.
Dharmagranthi, who looks after the horses and Tantripala, the keeper of the
cows, are Nakul a and Sahadeva respectively . I am Arjuna. Be not afraid. Oprince, you will soon see me defeat the Kauravas even in the sight of
Bhishma, Drona and Aswatthama and recover the cows. You will also gain
renown and it will be a lesson to you.”
Then Uttara folded his hands and said: “O Arjuna, how fortunate I am to
see you with my own eyes!  So, Arjuna is the victorious hero whose very
contact has put heart and courag e into me. Forgive the wrongs I have done
through ignorance.”
As they approached the Kaurava  host, Arjuna recounted some of his heroic
deeds, so that Uttara might not lose grip of his newly awaken ed courage.
Arriving in front of the Kaurava s, he got down, prayed to God, removed the
conch-bangles from his hands and put on leather gauntlets. He then tied a
cloth on his flowing hair, stood facing the east, meditated on his armour , got
into the chariot and gloried in the familiar feel of his famous Gandiva bow.
He stringed it and thrice twange d the string whose shrill note raised an echo
from all sides. Hearing the soun d, the heroes of the Kaurava army said to
one another: “This surely is Gandiva’ s voice.” When Arjuna stood on the
chariot in all his godlike stature and blew his conch Devadatta, the Kaurava
army was alarmed and a frenzied shout arose that the Pandavas had come.
The story of Uttara, who spoke boastfully in the ladies’ boudoirs and fled in
panic at the sight of the hostile array , has not been introdu ced in the
Mahabharata, merely as a comic interlude.
It is in ordinary human nature to look with contempt on lower levels of
conduct in ability . The rich scorn the poor; the beautiful, the plain; the
strong, the weak. Brave men despise cowards. But, Arjuna was no ordinary
man but a great soul and a true hero who felt that his duty as a strong, brave
man was to help others to rise above their weakness. Knowing that nature
had endowed him with courage and bravery at birth, and that he owed them
to no special exertions on his part, he had the true humility of the really
great and he did what he could to put courage into Uttara and make him
worthy of his lineage.
This was Arjuna’ s characteristic  nobility . He never abused his strength and
power . One of his many names is Bibhatsu, which means one who shrank
from doing an unworthy act, and he lived up to it.CHAPTER XLVI: PROMISE FULFILLED
THE chariot of Arjuna thunder ed on its way, seeming to shake the earth.
The hearts of the Kauravas quaked when they heard the twang of the
Gandiva bow .
“Our army must be arrayed well and with care. Arjuna has come,” said
Drona anxiously .
Duryodhana did not at all like the honour Drona did Arjuna by this anxiety ,
He said to Karna : “The Pandavas’ pledge was that they would spend twelve
years in the forest and the follow ing year undiscovered. The thirteenth year
has not ended yet. Arjuna has revealed himself before the time. Why then
should we give way to fear? The Pandavas will have to go again to the
forest for another twelve years. Drona is suffering from the cold feet of the
too learned. Let us leave him in the rear and advance to the battle."
Karna assented and said: “Our soldiers’ heart is not in the fight and they are
trembling with fear. They say that the man, who stands so proudly , bow in
hand, on the chariot, speeding towards us, is Arjuna. But why need we fear
even if it be Parasurama? I will myself stop the advancing warrior and
redeem my word to you, and fight him, aye, even if all the others stand
back. They may drive away the cows of the Matsya king while,
singlehanded, I shall give them  cover , engaging Arjuna in battle,” and
Karna, as usual, began to blow his own trumpet.
When Kripa heard these words of Karna, he said: “This is pure tomfoolery .
We must all make a combined  attack on Arjuna. That would be our one
chance of success. Do not, therefore, brag about your opposing  him alone
and unaided. ”
Karna grew angry . He said: “The acharya ever delights in singing Arjuna‘s
praises and in magnifying his prowess. Whether he does so from fear or
excessive fondness for the Pandavas, I do not know . Those, who are afraid,
need not fight, but may simply look on, while others, who are true to the
salt they have eaten, engage in battle. I, for one, a mere soldie r who loves
my friends and hates my enemies, will stand here and fight. What businesshave men learned in the Vedas, who love and praise their enemies, got
here?” said he sneeringly .
Aswatthama, Drona’ s son and Kripa’ s nephew , could not hear unmoved this
sneer at the venerable teachers. He said stemly to Karna: “We have not yet
taken the king back to Hastinap ura, and the battle is yet to be won. Your
brag is idle vainglory . It may be that we are not kshatriyas and that we
belong to the class that recites the Vedas and the sastras, but I have not been
able to find in any sastra that it is honourable for kings to seize kingdoms
by cheat ing at dice. Even those, who fight and conquer kingdoms, do not
crow too loudly about it, and I cannot see what you have done to be proud
of. The fire is silent and yet cooks the food. The sun shines  but not on
himself. Likewise, Mother earth sustains all things, movable and
immovable, and supports her burden without so much as a whisper . What
claim to praise has a kshatri ya who has unlawfully seized another ’s
kingdom at a game of dice? To have cheated the Pandavas of their kingdom
is no more a matter of glory than to have spread traps for unsuspecting
birds. O Duryod hana, O Karna, in what battle did your heroes defeat the
Pandavas? You dragged Draupadi to the assembly . Are you proud of it? You
have destroyed the Kaurava race like an empty-headed clod who fells a big
sandal tree for love of its fragrance. A fight with Arjuna, you will find is a
very different thing from a throw of the dice. The Gandiva will send forth
sharp arrows and not fours and twos as in the game of dice. Vain fools, do
you think that Sakuni can, by mere cheating, sneak a victory in battle for
you?”
The leaders of the Kaurava army  lost their patience and began a loud wordy
warfare. Seeing this, the grandsire was filled with sorrow and said:
“The wise man does not insult his teachers. One should engage in battle
only after a careful calculation of time, place and circumstance . Even wise
people often lose their balance and good sense over their own affairs.
Ruffled by anger , even the usually so sensible Duryodhana fails to
recognise that the wamor who stands braving our army is Arjuna. His
intellect has been clouded by anger . O Aswatthama, pray do not mind
Karna’ s offensive remarks. You must take them as intended merely to put
the preceptors on their mettle and sting them into action. This is not thetime to nurse enmity or sow dissension. Drona, Kripa and Aswatthama
should forget and forgive. Where can the Kauravas find in the whole world,
heroes superior to Drona, the preceptor , and his son Aswatthama, who
combine in themselves Vedic scholarship and kshatriya heroism? We know
of none other than Parasurama who can equal Drona. We can conquer
Arjuna only if we all join toget her and fight him. Let us address ourselves
to the task before us. If we quarrel amongst ourselves we cannot fight
Arjuna.”
Thus spoke the grandsire soothed by his noble words, angry feelings
subsided.
Bhishma turned  to Duryodhana and continued: “Best of kings, Arjuna has
come. The stipulated period of thirteen years terminated yesterday . Your
calculation is wrong, as men learned in the science of planetary  movements
will tell you. I knew that the period had ended when Arjuna blew  his conch.
Reflect a little before deciding on war. If you wish to make peace with the
Pandavas, now is the time for it. What do you seek, a just and honourable
peace or a mutually destructive war? Ponder well and make your choice.”
Duryodhana replied: “Revered sire, I have no wish for peace. I shall not
give even a village to the Pandavas. Let us get ready for war .”
Then Drona said: “Let prince Duryodhana take away a fourth of the army to
guard him and return to Hastinapura. Let another surround the cows and
seize them. If we return without seizing the cows it would amount to an
acknowledgment of defeat. With the rest of the army , the five of us will
give battle to Arjuna.”
The Kaurava forces ranged themselves accordingly in battle array .
Arjuna said: “O Uttara, I do not see Duryodhana’ s chariot or Duryodhana. I
see Bhishma standing, clad in armour . I think Duryodhana is driving away
the cows to Hastinapura; let us pursue him and recover the cows.” With
these words Arjuna moved away from the Kaurava army and went after
Duryodhana and the cows. And as he was going, he respectfully greeted his
teachers and the old grandsire, by drawing his Gandiva bow and sending
arrows so as to fall near their feet. Reverently saluting them in this heroic
fashion, he left them and pursued Duryodhana.Arjuna reached the place where he cows were gathered and put to rout the
marauding force s. He then turned to the cowherds and asked them to take
the cows to the byres which they did with great rejoicing. Arjuna then
pursued Duryodhana.
Seeing this, Bhishma and the other Kaurava warriors rushed to the rescue
and, surrounding Arjuna, sent forth arrows against him. Arjuna carried on a
wonderful fight. First, he made at Karna and drove him from the battlefield.
After that, he attacked and defeated Drona. Seeing Drona standing spent
with fatigue, Aswatthama joine d in the fight and attacked Arjuna, which
gave Arjuna an opportunity of letting Drona withdraw from the field. Then,
there ensued a bitter struggle between Aswatthama and Arjuna. When
Aswatthama grew weary , Kripa relieved him and maintained the attack
against Arjuna. But Kripa also sustained defeat and the whol e army was
routed and tied in fear. Though  rallied and brought back to the attack by
Bhishma, Drona and others, there was no fight left in them; and finally , they
left the field, after a glorious fight between Bhishma and Arjuna, which, it
is said, the gods themselves came to see.
The attempt to head off Arjun a’s pursuit of Duryodhana thus failed and
soon Arjuna came up with Duryodhana and strongly attacked him.
Duryodhana was defeated and fled from the battlefield, but not far because,
when Arjuna taunted him with cowardice, he turned round like a serpent
and resumed the fight. Bhishma and others surrounded and protected him,
Arjuna fought and finally , he employed a magic weapon which made them
all fall down unconscious on the battlefield. While they were in that
condition he snatched away .their garments. The seizure of the clothes of the
enemy was the sign of decisive victory in those days.
When Duryodha na came, Bhishma sent him back to the city. The whole
army returned to Hastinapura after this humiliating defeat.
Arjuna said: “O Uttara, turn back the horses. Our cows have been regained.
Our enemies have fled. O prince, return to your kingdom, adorning your
person with sandal paste and decked with flowers.” On the way back,
Arjuna deposited the weapons as before on the tree and dressed himself
once more as Brihannala. He sent messengers in advance to proclaim in the
city that Uttara had won a glorious victory .CHAPTER XLVII: VIRATA‘S DELUSION
AFTER defeatin g Susarma, king of Trigatta, Virata returned to his capital
amidst the acclamations of the citizens. When he reached his palace, he saw
that Uttara was not there and the womenfolk told him with much elation
that Uttara had set out to conqu er the Kauravas. They had not a doubt that
their handsome prince could conquer the whole world; but the king’ s heart
sank within him at the news, for he knew the impossible task which the
delicately nurtu red prince had taken on himself with no bette r following
than a eunuch. “My dearly loved son must be dead by now,” he cried,
overwhelmed with anguish.
He then bade his ministers collect and send as strong a force as could be got
together for rescuing Uttara if he was still alive and bring him back. Scouts
also were immediately despatched to find out Uttara’ s where abouts and
fate.
Dharmaputra, now disguised as the sanyasin Kanka, tried to comfort Virata
by assuring him that the prince could come to no harm, since Brihannala
had gone as his charioteer . “You do not know about her," said he. “I do.
Whosoever fights from a chariot driven by her, can be sure of victory .
Further , the news of Susarma’ s defeat must have reached there and the
Kauravas must have retreated.”
Meanwhile courtiers arrived from the field of battle with the glad news that
Uttara had defeated the Kaurava forces and recovered the kine. This seemed
too good to be true, even to the fond father , but Yudhishthira smilingly
reassured him. Said he: “Have no doubts, O king. What the messengers say
must be true. When Brihannala went out as charioteer , success was certain.
There is nothing  extraordinary in your son’s victory . I happen to know that
even Indra’ s charioteer or Krishna’ s cannot equal Brihannala.” This seemed
absurd to Virata, but he was too happy to resent it. He made large gifts of
precious stones and other wealth to the messengers who broug ht the good
news and ordered public rejoici ng. “My success over Susarma is nothing,”
he proclaimed. “The prince’ s is the real victory . Let special prayers of
thanksgiving be offered at all places of worship. Let all the principal streets
be decorated with flags and the citizens go in procession to strains oftriumphal music. Make all arrangements to receive, in a befitting manner ,
my lion-hearted boy .”
Virata sent out ministers, soldiers, and maidens to welcome his son,
returning in triumph. When the king retired to his private apartments, he
asked Sairandhri to bring the dice. He said to Kanka: “I cannot contain my
joy. Come, let us play ,” and sat down to a game with Y udhishthira.
They talked while they played and naturally , the king was full of his son’s
greatness and prowess. “See the glory of my son, Bhuminjaya.  He has put
the famed Kaurava warriors to flight.”
“Yes.” replied Yudhishthira with a smile. “Your son is indeed fortunate for,
without the best of good fortune, how could he have secured Brihannala to
drive his chariot?”
Virata was angry at this persistent glorification of Brihannala at the expense
of Uttar a. “Why  do you again  and again, babble about the eunuch?” he
cried. “While I am talking about my son’s victory , you expatiate on the
charioteering skill of the eunuch as if that were of any significance.”
The king’ s anger only increased  when Kanka remonstrated: “I know what I
am talking about. Brihannala is no ordinary person. The chario t she drives
can never see defeat and whoever is in it is sure of success in any
undertaking no matter how dif ficult."
Now , this perverse flouting could not be borne and Virata in a passion flung
the dice at Yudhishthira’ s face and followed this up with a blow on
Yudhishthira‘s cheek. Yudhishthira was hurt and blood flowed down his
face.
Sairandhri who was near by, wiped the blood with the edge of her garment
and squeezed it into a golden cup.
“Why all this fuss? What are you collecting the blood into a cup for?”
demanded the angry king, who was still in a passion.
“A Sanyasin’ s blood may not be split on the ground. O king,” replied
Sairandhri. “The rains will fail in your land for as many years as there are
drops in the blood that is split on the earth. That was why I collected the
blood in this cup. I fear you do not know Kanka’ s greatness.”Meanwhile the gatekeeper announced: “Uttara and Brihannala have arrived.
The prince is waiting for an audience with the king.” V irata got up excitedly
and said: “Ask him in, ask him in.” And Yudhishthira whispered to the
sentry: “Let Uttara come alone. Brihannala should stay behind.”
He did this to prevent a catastrophe for he knew Arjuna would be unable to
control his anger when he saw the injury on his brother ’s face. He could not
bear to see Dharmaputra hurt by anyone except in fair battle.
Uttara entered and paid due homage to his royal father . When he turned to
do obeis ance to Kanka he was horrified to see his bleeding face, for now he
knew that Kanka was the great Y udhishthira.
“O king,” he cried, “who was it that caused hurt to this great one?"
Virata looked at his son and said: “Why all this ado about it? I struck him
for untimely and envious belittling of you when I was in an ocean of delight
at the news of your glorious victory . Each time I mentioned you, this
unlucky brahmana extolled your charioteer , the eunuch, and gave the
victory to him. It was too silly really , and I am sorry I struck him, but it is
not worth talking about.”
Uttara was overwhelmed with fear. “Alas! You have done great wrong. Fall
at his feet right now, father , and pray for forgiveness or we will be
destroyed, root and branch.”
Virata, to whom  all this was inexplicable, stood with a puzzle d frown not
knowing what to do, but Uttara was so anxious and importunate that he
yielded and bowed to Y udhishthira asking for pardon.
Thereafter , embracing his son and making him sit, Virata said: “My boy,
you are truly a hero. I am in a fever of impatience to hear all about it. How
did you defeat the Kaurava army? How did you recover the kine?”
Uttara hung his head down. “I conquered no army ,” he said, “and rescued
no cows. All that was the work of a god-prince. He took up our cause,
rescued me from destruction, put the Kaurava soldiers to flight and brought
the herd back. I did nothing.”
The king could hardly believe his ears. “Where is that god- prince?” he
asked. “I must see and thank the hero who rescued my son and beat backmy foes. I will give my daughter , Uttara, in marriage to him. Go and fetch
him in.”
“He has disappeared for the time being,” replied the prince, “but I think he
will come again either today or tomorrow .” Uttara spoke thus because
Arjuna was indeed a prince of the gods and had also for the time being
disappeared in Brihannala.
In Virata’ s hall of assembly , all the leading citizens had gathered to
celebrate the king’ s Victory and the prince’ s. Kanka, Valala the cook,
Brihannala, Tantripala and Dharmagranthi who were responsible for the
victories, arrived also and entering the hall, to the surprise of everyone sat
among the princes unbid. Some  explained the conduct by saying that, after
all, these humbler folk had rendered invaluable service at a critical time and
really deserved recognition.
Virata entered the court. On seeing Kanka sanyasin and the cook and the
others seated in places reserved for princes and the nobility the king lost his
temper and gave loud vent to his displeasure. When they felt they had
enough fun, the Pandavas discl osed their identity to the amaze ment of all
present.
Virata was beside himself with joy to think that it was the Pandava princes
and Panc hali who had been ministering to him all these days in disguise. He
embraced Kanka in exuberant gratitude and made a formal surrender of his
kingdom and his all to him, of course immediately receiving them back
with thanks. Virata also insisted that he should give his daughter in
marriage to Arjuna.
But Arjuna said: “No, that would not be proper , for the princess learnt
dancing and music of me. I, as her teacher , am in the position of father to
her.”  He, however , agreed to accept her for his son Abhimanyu.
Meanwhile, envoys arrived from the wicked and treacherous Duryodhana
with a message for Yudhishthira. “O son of Kunti,” they said. “Duryodhana
feels very sorry that owing to the hasty action of Dhananjaya, you have to
go back to the woods again. He let himself be recognised before the end of
the thirteenth year and so, in accordance with your undertaking, you have to
dwell in the forest for another twelve years.”Dharmaputra laughed and said: “Messengers, return quickly to Duryodhana
and tell him to make further enquiry . The venerable Bhishma  and others
learned in the stars will no doubt tell him that full thirteen years had been
completed befor e your forces heard again the twang of Dhanan jaya’ s bow
and fled in fear .”CHAPTER XLVIII: TAKING COUNSEL
The thirteenth year during which the Pandavas had to remain undiscovered
came to an end. No longer obliged to be in disguise, they left Virata's
capital as Pandavas and settle d openly in Upaplavya, another place in
Matsya territory . From there, they sent emissaries to summon their friends
and relatives.
From Dwaraka came Balarama and Krishna with Arjuna's wife Subhadra,
and her son, Abhimanyu and accompanied by many Yadava warriors. Loud
and long was the blare of trumpet conchs as the Matsya prince and the
Pandavas went forth to receive Janardana. Indrasena and many  others like
him, who had at the beginning of the preceding year left the Pandavas in the
forest, rejoined them with their chariots at Upaplavya. The Kasi prince and
Saibya ruler arrived with their forces. Drupada, the Panchala prince, was
there too with three divisions, bringing with him Sikhandin and Draupadi’ s
sons and her brother Dhrishtadyumna. There were many other princes
gathered at Upaplavya well attached to the Pandavas.
Abhimanyu’ s marriage to princess Uttara was solenmized according to
Vedic rites before that illustrious  gathering of friendly heroes. The wedding
celebrations over, they met in conclave in Virata’ s hall of assembly . Krishna
sat next to Yudhishthira and Virata, while Balarama and Satyaki were
seated beside Drupada. As the bustle died down, all eyes were turned on
Krishna, who now rose to speak.
“You all know ,” said Krishna to the hushed assembly , “the story  of the great
deceit-how Yudhishthira was cheated at the game-board and deprived of his
kingdom and exiled with his brothers and Draupadi to the forest. For
thirteen years, the sons of Pandu have patiently borne their trouble in
redemption of their pledged word. Ponder well and counsel a course which
will be in consonance with dharma and contribute to the glory and welfare
of both Pandavas and Kauravas. For, Dharmaputra desires nothing that he
cannot justly claim. He wishes nothing but good even to the sons of
Dhritarashtra who deceived him and did him grievous wrong. In giving
your counsel, bear in mind the fraud and meanness of the Kaura vas ‘as well
as the honourable magnanimity of the Pandavas. Devise a just andhonourable settlement. We do not know what Duryodhana has in his mind. I
feel we should send an able and upright emissary to him to persuade him to
a peace ful settlement by the restoration of half the kingdom to
Yudhishthira.”
Balarama then rose to address the gathering.
“You have just heard Krishna,” he said. “The solution he propounds is wise
and just. I endorse it as good for both Duryodhana and Dharmaputra. If
Kunti’ s sons can get back their kingdom by a peaceful settlement, nothing
could be better for them, the Kauravas and for all concerned. Only then will
there be happine ss and peace in the land. Someone has to go to convey to
Duryodhana Yudhishthira’ s wish for a peaceful settlement and bring an
answer from him, a man who has the weight and the ability to bring about
peace and good understanding.
“The envoy should get the co-operation of Bhishma, Dhritarashtra, Drona
and Vidura, Kripa and Aswat thama and even of Karna and Sakuni if
possible, and secure support for Kunti’ s sons. He should be one who, on no
account, would give way to anger. Dharmaputra, with full knowledge of
consequences, staked his kingdom and lost it, obstinately disregarding the
expostulations of friends. Fully aware that he was no match for the adept
Sakuni, he yet played against him. He cann ot now complain but can only
supplicate for his rights. A fit envoy would be one who is not a warmonger
but is dead set, in spite of every difficulty , on achieving a peaceful
settlement. Princes, I desire you to approach Duryodhana tactfully and
make peace with him. Let us avoid an armed conflict by all the means in
our power. Only  that which accrues in peace is worthwhile. Out of war,
nothing but wrong can issue.”
Balarama’ s position was that Yudhishthira knew what he was doing when
he gambled away his kingdom and could not now claim it as of right. The
fulfilment of the conditions of exile could only give the Pandavas their
personal freedom and not their kingdom, that is to say, they need not serve
another term of exile in the forest but it gave them no right to the return of
their kingdom. Dharmaputra could only supplicate for the return  of what he
had lost and not claim it as of right.Balarama did not relish an armed conflict among scions of the same family
and rightly held that war would lead only to disaster .
The poet puts an eternal truth in Balarama’ s mouth.
Satyaki, the Yadava warrior , who heard Balarama speak thus, could not
contain himself. He rose in anger and spoke indignantly:
“Balarama’ s words do not strike me as in the least degree just. One can, if
skilful enough, make out a plausible plea for any case, but not all the skill in
the world can convert wrong into right or injustice into justice. I must
protest against Balarama’ s stand which fills me with disgust, Do we not see
in one and the same tree, one branch bowed with fruit and another sticking
out gaunt and useless? So, of these brothers, Krishna speaks words which
breathe the spirit of dharma while Balarama’ s attitude is unworthy  and if
you giant-what cannot be doub ted that the Kauravas cheated Yudhishthira
of his share of the kingdom why then, allowing them to keep it is as unjust
as confirming a thief in the possession of his booty! Any one, who finds
fault with Dharmaputra, does so in cowardly fear of Duryodh ana, not for
any sound reason. O princes, forgive my harsh speech. Not of his own
volition but because the Kaurav as pressed and invited him to do so, did the
inexpert and unwilling Dharmaputra play with a sharper that game so
fraught with disaster . Why should he bow and supplicate before
Duryodhana, now that he has fulfilled his pledges? Yudhishthira is not a
mendicant and need not beg. He has kept his word and so have his brothers-
twelve years in exile in the forest and twelve months thereafter in disguise
according to their pledge and yet, Duryodhana and his associates, most
shamelessly and dishonestly , question the performance. I shall defeat these
impudent villains in battle and they shall either seek Yudhishthira’ s pardon
or meet their doom. How can a righteous war be wrong in any case? There
is no sin in slaying enemies who take up arms and fight. To supplicate
before the enem y, is to incur disgrace. If Duryodhana desires war, he can
have it and we shall be quite ready for it. Let there be no delay and let us
get on with the preparations. Duryodhana is not going to part with territory
without a war and it would be folly to waste time.”
Drupada’ s heart  was gladdened by Satyaki’ s resolute words. He rose and
said: “Satyaki is right and I support him. Soft words will not bringDuryodhana round to reason. Let us continue our preparations for war and
let our friends he warned withou t loss of time to bring up their forces. Send
word instantly to Salya, Dhrish taketu, Jayatsena and Kekaya. We must, of
course, send a suitable envoy to Dhritarashtra: the learned brahmana, who
conducts the religious ceremoni es in my court, can be sent to Hastinapura
with confidence. Instruct him well as to what he should say to Duryodhana
and how he should convey the message to Bhishma, Dhritarashtra and
Dronacharya.”
When Drupada concluded, Vasudeva (Krishna, the son of Vasudeva) rose
and addressing Drupada, said:
“What you suggest is practicab le and also conforms to the kingly code.
Baladeva and I are bound to the Kauravas and the Pandavas with equal ties
of affection. We came here for princess Uttara’ s wedding and will return
now to our city. Great are you among the princes of the land, alike in age
and wisdom, and entitled to advise us all. Dhritarashtra too holds you in
high esteem. Drona and Kripa are your boyhood friends. It is therefore only
right that you should instruct the brahmana envoy on his mission of peace.
If he fails to persuade Duryo dhana out of his error , prepare for the
inevitable conflict, my friends and send word to us.”
The conference ended and Krishna left for Dwaraka with his people. The
Pandavas and their allies went on with their preparations. Messengers went
forth to all the friendly princes who got busy and mobilised their respective
armies.
Meanwhile, Duryodhana and his brothers were not idle. They also began
preparing for the coming conflict and sent word to their friends to get their
contingents ready for war, News of these preparations on both sides soon
spread throughout the land: “The constant rapid journeyings back and forth
of princ es caused a great stir everywhere. The earth shook beneath the
heavy tramp of marching legion s,” says the poet. It would appear that even
in olden days, military preparations were made in much the same way as in
our times .
Drupada called in his brahmana and said to him: “You know Duryodhana’ s
bent of mind as well as the qualities of the Pandavas. Go to him as theemissary of the Pandavas The Kauravas deceived the Pandavas with the
connivance of their father Dhritarashtra who would not listen to the sage
advice of Vidura. Show the old, weak king, who is misled by his son, the
path of dharma and wisdom. You will find in Vidura a great ally in this task.
Your mission may lead to differences of opinion among the elder statesmen
such as Bhishma, Drona and Kripa as well as among the war-lords and, if
this happens, it will be some time before those differences are smoothed
out, which will be time gained for the completion of the Pandavas’ war
preparations. As long as you are in Duryodhana’ s capital talkin g of peace,
their preparations for war will receive a set-back which is all to the good
from the Pandavas’ standpoint. If, by a miracle, you are able to come back
with good terms of peace, so much the better . I do not expect Duryodhana
will agree to a peaceful settlem ent. Still, to send one on a peace mission
will be advantageous to us.”
In Dece mber 1941, the Japanese were carrying on negotiations with the
Americans and, immediately on the breakdown of those talks, took them
unawares and attacked Pearl Harbour destroying their naval forces there.
Drupada’ s instru ctions to the brahmana would show that this was no new
technique and that even in the old days, the same method was followed of
carrying on negotiations and even sincerely working for peace, but
simultaneously preparing with unremitting vigour , for outbreak of war and
carrying on peace talks with the object of creating dissens ions in the
enemy’ s ranks. There is nothing new under the sun!CHAPTER XLIX: ARJUNA'S CHARIOTEER
HAVING sent Drupada’ s brahmana to Hastinapura on the peace mission,
the Pandavas sent word, at the same time, to the princes likely to favour
their cause to collect their forces and hold themselves in readiness for war.
To Dwaraka. Arjuna went himself.
Having understood through his spies the turn events were taking,
Duryodhana too did not remain idle Learning that Vasudeva (Krishna) was
back in his home city, he sped towards Dwaraka in his chariot, as fast as his
swiftest horses could take him. The two of them, Arjuna and Duryodhana,
thus reached Dwaruka on the same day .
Krishna was fast asleep. Becaus e they were his close relatives, Arjuna and
Duryodhana could go into his bedroom. There, they both waited for Krishna
to wake up. Duryodhana, who went in first, seated himself on a decorated
throne—chair at the head of the bed, while Arjuna kept standing at its foot
with arms folded in respectful posture, When Mahadeva woke up, his eyes
fell on Arjuna who stood in front of him and he gave him warm  welcome.
Turning then to Duryodhana, he welcomed him too and asked  them what
brought them both to Dwaraka. Duryodhana was the first to speak.
“It looks ,” said he, “as though war would break out between us soon. If it
does, you must support me. Arjuna and I are equally beloved of you. We
both claim equal ly close relationship with you. You cannot say that either of
us is nearer to you than the other . I came here before Arjuna. Tradition has
it that he who came first should be shown preference. Janardana, you are
the greatest among the great; so it is incumbent on you to set an example to
others. Confirm with your conduct the traditional dharma and remember
that it was I who came first.”
To which Purushottama (Krishna) answered: “Son of Dhritarashtra, it may
be that you came here first, but it was Kunti’ s son that I saw immediately on
waking up. If you were the first arrival, it was Arjuna who first caught my
eye. So, even in this respect, your claims on me are equal and I am
therefore bound  to render assistance to both sides. In distribut ing favours,
the traditional usage is to begin with the junior - most among the recipients.I would, therefore, offer the choice to Arjuna first. The Narayanas, my
tribesmen, are my equals in battle and constitute a host, large and almost
invincible. In my distribution of assistance, they will be on one side, and I
individually on the other , but I shall wield no weapon and take no part in
actual fighting.”
Turning to Arjuna he said, “Part ha, think it over well. Would you want me,
alone and weaponless or would you prefer the prowess of the Narayanas?
Exercise the right to the first choice which custom gives you as the younger
man.”
Scarcely had Krishna finished when Arjuna said with reverence and without
hesitation: “I would be content if you are with us, though you may wield no
weapon."
Duryodhana could hardly conta in himself for joy at what he thought was
Arjuna’ s imbecile choice. He gladly chose the help of Vasudeva ’s army and
his request was granted. Please d with the acquisition of a mighty force,
Duryodhana went to Baladeva and told him the story . As he finished
speaking, the mighty Balarama said: “Duryodhana, they must have told you
all I said at the time of the marriage of Virata’ s daughter . I pleaded your
case and urged everything that could be said for you. Often have I told
Krishna that we have equal ties with the Kauravas and the Pandavas but my
words failed to carry conviction to him. I am helpless. It is impossible for
me to side one whom Krishna opposes. I will not help Partha and I cannot
support you against Krishna. Duryodhana, you come of an illustrious line
which is respected by all the princes of the land. Well, then, if it must be
war, bear yourself in accordance with the kshatriya code,” said he.
Duryodhana returned to Hastinapura in high spirits saying to himself:
“Arjuna has made a fool of himself. The great army of Dwarak a will fight
on my side and Balarama’ s good wishes too are with me. Vasudeva has
been left without an army .”
“Dhananjaya, why did you choose thus unwisely , preferring me alone and
unarmed to my fully equipped and heroic forces?” asked Krishna of Arjuna
with a smile, when they were alone. Arjuna answered: “My ambition is to
achieve glory even like yours. You have the power and prowess to face allthe princ es of the land and their hordes in batttle single-handed. I too feel I
can do it. So, I desire that I should win the battle with you driving my
chariot unarmed. I have desired this for long and you have today fulfilled
my wish.”
Vasudeva smiled  again and pronounced this benediction: “Are you trying to
compete with me? May you succeed.” for he was pleased with Arjuna’ s
decision
This is the sacred story of how Krishna became Partha’ s charioteer .CHAPTER L: SALYA AGAINST HIS NEPHEWS
SALYA, the ruler of Madradesa , was the brother of Mudri, the mother of
Nakula and Saha deva. He heard that the Pandavas were campin g in the city
of Upaplavya and making preparations for war. He collected a very big
army and set off towards that city to join the Pandavas. Salya’ s army was so
large that where it halted for rest, the encampment extended over a length of
nearly fifteen miles.
News of Salya and his marching  forces reached Duryodhana who, deciding
that Salya should somehow be persuaded to join his side, instructed his
officers to provide him and his great army with all facilities and treat them
to sumptuous hospitality . In accordance with Duryodhana’ s instruction,
several beautifully decorated resthouses were erected at several places on
the route, at which Sulya and his men were treated to wondrous  hospitality .
Food and drink were lavishly provided. Salya was exceedingly pleased with
the attentions paid to him but assumed that all this had been arranged by his
nephew , Yudhishthira. Salya‘s army marched on, the earth shaking beneath
their heavy strides. Feeling very pleased with the hospitality , he called the
waiting attendants one day and said to them:
“I must reward you all who have treated me and my soldiers with so much
love and attentio n. Please tell Kunti’ s son that he should let me do this, and
bring me his consent.”
The servants went and told their master , Duryodhana, this.
Duryodhana, who was all the time moving unobserved with the party
waiting on Salya and his soldiers, at once took this opportunity to present
himself before Salya, and say how honoured he felt at Salya’ s acceptance of
the Kaurava hospitality . This amazed Salya who till then had no suspicion
of the truth, and he was also touched by the chivalry of Duryodhana in
lavishing kingly hospitality on a partisan of the Pandavas.
Greatly moved, he exclaimed, “How noble and kind of you! How can I
repay you?”
Duryodhana replied: “You and your forces should fight on my side. This is
the reward I ask of you.”Salya was stunned,
The Puranas wherein right cond uct is always preached, sometimes set out
stories in which conduct, not in conformity with Dharma, seems condoned.
Is it right, one may ask, for religious books thus to seem to justify wrong?
A little reflection will enable one to see the matter in proper light. It is
necessary to bring home the fact that even wise, good and great men are
liable to fall into error . That is why the Puranas, although ever seeking to
instil Dharma, contain narratives to show how in this world even good
people sometimes sin against Dharma, as though irresistibly driven to do so.
This is to press home the truth that howsoever learned one may be, humility
and constant vigilance are absolutely necessary if one wishes to avoid evil.
Why indeed, did the great authors of our epics write about the lapses of
Rama in the Ramayana and Yudhishthira in the Mahabharata? Where was
the need  to make mention of them and then labour arguments to explain
them away , thereby disturbing men’ s minds? It was not as though others
had discovered the lapses and V yasa and V almiki had to defend their heroes.
The stories are artistic creations in which lapses themselves impress the
desired moral. The parts dealing with the lapse s deeply distress the readers
mind and serve  as solemn warnings of pitfalls which wait to engulf the
careless. They dispose the mind  to humility and watchfulness and make it
realise the need for divine guidance.
The modern cinema also proje cts on the screen much that is bad and
immoral. Whatever may be the explanation offered by the protagonists of
the cinema, evil is presented on the screen in an attractive fashio n that grips
people’ s minds and tempts them  into the path of wickedness. Not so in the
Puranas. Although they do point out that even great men now and again fell
into error and committed wron g, the presentation is such as to warn the
reader and not to allure him into evil ways. This is the striking difference
between our epics and the modern talkies, which arises from the difference
in the character of the people who produced them.
“You are the same unto us both. I must mean as much to you as the
Pandavas. Y ou must agree to come to my aid," said Duryodhana.Salya answered: “Be it so.”
Flattered by Duryodhana’ s splendid reception, Salya deserted the Pandavas
who were entitle d to his love and esteem and pledged his word  to fight on
Duryodhana’ s side which shows what dangers may lurk in receiving the
hospitality of kings.
Feeling that it would not be right to go back without meeting Yudhishthira,
Salya then turned to Duryodhan a saying: “Duryodhana, believe  me. I have
given you my word of honour . I must however meet Yudhishthira and tell
him what I have done.”
“Go, see him and return soon. And do not forget your promise to me,” said
Duryodhana .
“Good luck to you. Go back to your palace. I will not betray you.” Saying
this, Salya went to the city of Upaplavya where Y udhishthira was camping.
The Pandavas received the ruler of Madra with great eclat. Nakula and
Sahadeva were joyous beyond  measure to see their uncle to whom the
Pandavas narrat ed all their hardships and sufferings. When they started
talking about obtaining his help in the war that was impending, Salya
related to them the story of his promise to Duryodhana. Yudhish thira saw at
once that it had been a mistake to have taken Salya’ s assistance for granted,
thereby letting Duryodhana forestall them. Concealing his disappointment
as best he could, Y udhishthira addressed Salya thus:
“Great warrior , you are bound  to keep the promise you have made to
Duryodhana. You are the equal of Vasudeva in battle and Karna will have
you as his chario teer when he seeks Arjuna’ s life in the battlefie ld. Are you
going to be the cause of Arjuna’ s death? Or are you going to save him then?
I know I cannot fairly ask this of you. Still I do.”
To which Salya rejoined:
“My lad, I have  been tricked into giving Duryodhana my word and I shall
be ranged against you in battle. But when Karna proceeds to attack Arjuna,
if I happen to be his chariote er, you may take it he will go to battle
disheartened and Arjuna shall be saved. Fear not. The sorrows and insults,
which were visited on Draupa di and you all, will soon be an avengedmemory . Henceforth, yours will be good luck. No one can prevent or alter
what has been ordained by fate. I have acted wrongly . Bear with me.”CHAPTER LI: VRITRA
INDRA, the Lord of the three regions, was once so drunk with pride that he
quite forgot the courteous manners and forms that the gods had hitherto
observed. When  Brihaspati, preceptor of the gods, foremost in all branches
of learning, and venerated alike by the gods and the asuras, came to his
court, Indra did not rise from his seat to receive the acharya or ask him to be
seated and failed to do the customary honours. In his great conceit, Indra
persuaded himse lf to believe that the sastras allowed him as a king in court
the prerogative of receiving guests seated. Brihaspati was hurt by Indra’ s
discourtesy and, attributing it to the arrogance of prosperity , silently left the
assembly . Without the high-prie st of the gods, the court lost in splendour
and dignity and became an unimpressive gathering.
Indra soon realized the foolishn ess of his conduct and, sensing trouble for
himself from the acharya’ s displ easure, he thought to make up with him by
falling at his feet and asking for forgiveness. But this he could not do,
because Brihaspati had, in his anger , made himself invisible. This preyed on
Indra’ s mind. With Brihaspati gone, Indra’ s strength began to decline, while
that of the asuras increased, which encouraged the latter to attack the gods.
Then Brahma, taking pity on the beleaguered gods, advised them to take
unto themselves a new acharya.
Said he to them: “You have, through Indra’ s folly, lost Brihaspati, Go now
to Twashta’s son Visvarupa and request that noble spirit to be your
preceptor and all will be well with you.”
Heartened by these words, the gods sought the youthful anchorite V isvarupa
and made their request to him saying: “Though young in years, you are well
versed in the V edas. Do us the honour of being our teacher .”
Visvarupa agree d, to the great advantage of the gods for, as a result of his
guidance and teaching, they were saved from the harrying asuras.
Visvarupa’ s mother was of the asura clan of daityas, which caused Indra to
regard Visvarupa with suspici on. He feared that because of his birth,
Visvarupa migh t not be quite loyal and his suspicion gradually  deepened.
Apprehending danger to himself  from this descendent of the enemies of thegods, Indra sought to entice him into error with the temptresses of his court
and so weaken him spiritually , but Visvarupa did not succumb. The artful
and seductive blandishments of Indra‘s glamour girls had no effect on the
young ascetic. He held fast to his vow of celibacy . When Indra  found that
his plan of seduction failed, he gave way to murderous thoughts and one
day killed V isvarupa with the V ajrayudha.
The story goes that the world suffers vicariously for this great sin of Indra
and, as a resul t of it, parts of the earth turned alkaline and became
unsuitable for cultivation and women came to be afflicted with the physical
troubles and uncleanness pecul iar to them. The frothing of water is also
attributed to this.
Twashta in his great rage and grief at Indra’ s cruel killing of his son and,
desirous of avenging his death, performed a great sacrifice and out of the
sacrificial flame s sprang Indra’ s mortal enemy Vritra. Him Twashta sent
against the chief of the gods, saying: “Enemy of Indra, may you be strong
and may you kill Indra.”
A great battle raged between the two in which Vritra was gaining the upper
hand. When the battle was going against Indra, the rishis and the gods
sought refuge in great Vishnu who offered them protection and said to
them: “Be not afraid. I shall enter Indra's Vajrayudha and he will win the
battle in the end.” And they returned in good heart.
They went to Vritra and said to him: “Please make friends with Indra. You
are both equal in strength and valour ."
Vritra respectfu lly answered: “O blameless ones, how can Indra and I
become friends? Forgive me. There cannot be friendship between rivals for
supremacy . Two great powers cannot co-exist as you know .”
The rishis said in reply: “Do not entertain such doubts. Two good souls can
be friends and their friendship is of enduring quality .”
Vritra yielded saying: “Well, then, I shall cease fighting. But I have no faith
in Indra . He might take me unawares. So I seek this boon of you, namely ,
that neither by day nor by night, neither with dry weapons nor with wet
ones, neither with stone nor with wood, nor with metals, nor with arrows
shall Indra be able to take my life.”“So be it,” said the rishis and the gods.
Hostilities ceased. But soon Vritra’ s fears were confirmed. Indra only
feigned friendsh ip for Vritra but was, all the time, waiting for a suitable
opportunity to slay him. One evening, he met Vritra on the beach and began
to attack him in the twilight. The battle had raged for a long while when
Vritra praising the Lord Vishnu, said to Indra: “Meanest of the mean, why
do you not use the unfailing Vajrayudha? Hallowed by Hari, use it against
me and I shall attain blessedness through Hari.”
Indra maimed Vritra by chopping off his right arm but, nothing daunted, the
latter hurled with his left hand, his iron mace at his assailant who thereupon
cut down his other arm also. When Indra disappeared into the mouth of
Vritra, great was the consternation of the gods .
But Indra was not dead. He ripped Vritra’ s belly open and issuing forth,
went to the nearby beach and directing his thunderbolt at the water hurled it
so that the surf flew and hit Vritra. Vishnu having entered the foam, it
became a deadly weapon and the mighty V ritra lay dead.
The long battle thus ended and the afflicted world heaved a sigh of relief.
But to Indra himself, the end of the war brought only ignominy  because his
victory was secured through sin and deceit and he went into hiding for sheer
shame.
Indra’ s disappearance caused the gods and the rishis great distress for, a
people without a king or a coun cil of state to govern them cannot prosper .
So they went to the good and mighty king Nahusha and offered him the
crown.
“Forgive me, I cannot be your king. Who am I to aspire to the seat of Indra?
How can I protect you? It is impossible,” he humbly objecte d. But they
insisted, saying:  “Do not hesita te. Be anointed our king. All the merit and
potency of our penance will be yours and be an addition to your strength.
The power and the energy of everyone you set your eyes on shall be
transferred to you and you will be invincible." Thus over-powered, he
agreed.
Revolution is no new thing. This story shows that, even in the world of the
gods, there was a revolution leading to Indra's dethronement and Nahusha’ sinstallation as king in his stead. The story of Nahusha’ s fall is also
instructive.CHAPTER LII: NAHUSHA
THE sin of the unrighteous slaughter of Vritra pulled Indra down from his
high estate and made him a fugitive. Nahusha became the king of the gods
in his stead.
Nahusha started  well, assisted by the merit and the fame earned by him
while he was a king on earth. Thereafter , he fell on evil days. The
assumption of the kingship of the gods filled him with arrogance. He lost
his humility and became filled with lawless desires.
Nahusha indulge d freely in the pleasures of heaven and gave himself up to
untamed and lecherous thoughts. One day, he saw Indra’ s wife and became
enamoured of her. Possessed by evil thoughts, he spoke in tones of
command to the assembled gods:
“Why has not Sachidevi, the wife of the king of the gods, come  to me? Am
I not the king of the gods now? Send her to my house soon.”
When she learn t this, Indra’ s wife was indignant. In fear and distress, she
went to Brihasp ati and cried out: “Preceptor , save me from this wicked
person.”  Brihaspnti offered her protection. “Fear not,” he said, “Indra will
soon be back. Stay here with me. Y ou will regain your husband.”
When Nahusha learnt that Sachidevi did not agree to fall in with his wishes
and that she sought and obtained  shelter under Brihaspati’ s roof, he became
exceedingly angry .
The king’ s displeasure frighten ed the gods. They protested: “King of the
gods, be not angry. Your anger will make the world sad. Sachidevi is
another ’s wife, do not covet her. Do not swerve from the path of
righteousness. ”
But, the infatuated Nahusha would not listen to them. Tauntingly , he said to
them: “When Indra lusted for Ahalya, where were your principles of
righteousness and good conduct? Why did you not prevent him then and
why do you stop me now? What did you do when he so shamelessly
murdered Visvarupa when the latter was in penance and where was your
virtuous horror when he killed Vritra through deceit? Sachidevi’ s onlycourse is to come and live with me and it will be for your good to get her
reconciled to my proposal and leave her in my charge. So, now set about
it,” ordered Nahusha. The affrighted gods decided to talk the matter over
with Brihaspati and somehow contrive to bring Sachidevi to Nahusha. They
all went to Brihaspati and related to him what Nahusha had said and
pleaded that Sachidevi should submit to Nahushas’ desires.
At whic h, the chaste Sachidevi  shook with shame and fear and cried out:
“My God! I cannot do it. I sought refuge in you. Oh brahmana, do protect
me.”
Brihaspati consoled her and said: “He, who betrays one who has sought
refuge, will meet with destruction. The very earth will not let the seed, that
he sows, sprout. I will not give you up; Nahusha’ s end is approaching; be
not afraid.” He indicated a way of escape from her difficult situation by
hinting that she should pray for time, and the shrewd Sachidevi took the
hint and bravely went to Nahusha’ s palace.
As soon as Nahusha saw her, pride and lust having deprived  him of his
senses, he was beside himself with joy and said: “O fair one, do not
tremble. I am the lord of the three regions; there can be no sin in your
becoming my wife.”
Hearing the wicked man’ s words, the virtuous Indrani, Indra’ s wife,
trembled for a moment. Soon regaining composure she replied: “King of
the gods , before I become yours , I have a request to make. Is Indra alive or
is he dead? If he is alive, where is he? If, after making enquiries and
searching for him, I do not find him, then no sin will attach to me and I
could become your wife with a clear conscience.”
Nahusha said: “What you say is right. Go and search for him and be sure to
return. Remember the plighted  word.” Saying this, he sent her back to
Brihaspati’ s house.
The gods went to the great Vishnu and complained to him of Nahusha.
They said: “Lord, it was your might that killed Vritra but Indra bears the sin
of it, and ashamed and afraid to show himself in his unclean state, he has
hidden himself. Pray indicate a way of deliverance for him.” Narayana saidin reply: “Let him worship me; he will be cleansed of sin and the evil-
minded Nahusha will meet with destruction.”
Sachidevi prayed to the goddess of chastity , and, by her grace, reached
where Indra was in hiding. Indra had reduced himself to the size of an atom
and hid himself in a fibre of the stem of a lotus plant growing in
Manasarovar . He was doing penance in that state waiting for better days.
Sachidevi could  not contain herself for sorrow at her husband’ s plight and
burst into tears. She acquainted him with her troubles.
Indra spoke words of courage to her. “Nahusha’ s end is drawin g near," he
said. “Go to him by yourself and tell him that you consent to his proposal.
Ask him to come to your residence in a palanquin carried by ascetics. Then
Nahusha will be destroyed.”
Sachidevi went and pretended to agree to Nahusha’ s proposal as Indra had
asked her to do. Overjoyed that she had returned to him in this complaisant
mood, the foolish Nahusha burst out: “Blessed one, I am your slave and
ready to do your every bidding. Y ou have been true to your word.”
“Yes. I have come back. You will be my husband. I want you to do
something whic h I very much desire. Are you not the lord of the world? It
is my wish that you should come majestically to my house in a grander
style than the great Vishnu or Rudra or the asuras. Let the palanquin be
borne by the seven rishis. I shall then be glad and receive you and bid you
welcome,” she said.
Nahusha fell into the trap. “What a grand idea! Your imagination is
wonderful. It pleases me excee dingly . It is but meet that the great rishis
should carry me, who am blesse d with the powers of absorbing  the energy
of those  on whom my eyes fall. I shall do exactly as you have wished,” said
he, and sent her back home. The infatuated Nahusha called the rishis and
bade them carry him on their shoulders. At this sacrilege, the three worlds
were aghast and trembled. But worse was to come as the palanquin was
carried along. Inflamed with thoughts of the beautiful Sachidevi waiting for
him, Nahusha was impatient to reach her soon. So he began goading the
rishi-bearers of his palanquin to go faster and he went so far in his mad
wickedness as to kick Agastya, one of the bearers, saying “sarpa, sarpa.”(‘Sarpa’ means ‘to move’ but ‘sarpa’ is also serpent.) The insanity of lust
and arrogance had reached its culmination—Nahusha’ s cup of iniquity was
full. “Meanest of the mean, do thou fall from heaven and becom e a sarpa on
earth,” cursed the rishi in his wrath.
Immediately Nahusha fell head long, clown from heaven, and became a
python in the jungle and had to wait for several thousand years for his
deliverance.
Indra was resto red to his state. He became the king of the gods and
Sachidevi’ s grief ended .
Relating this story of the sufferings of Indra and his wife to Yudhishthira
and Draupadi at Upaplavya, their uncle Salya tried to comfort them.
“Victory awaits the patient. Those, whom prosperity makes arrogant, meet
with destruction. You, your brothers and Draupadi have gone through
untold sufferings like Indra and his wife. Your trials will soon be over and
you wiil regain your kingdom. The evil-minded Karna and Duryodhana will
be destroyed even as Nahusha was,” said Salya.CHAPTER LIII: SANJAYA’S MISSION
THE Pandavas were camping at Upaplavya in Virata’ s territory . From there,
they sent emissaries to all friend ly rulers. Contingents arrived from all parts
of the country and soon the Pand avas had a mighty force of seven divisions.
The Kauravas did likewise and collected an army of eleven divisions.
Then, as now, a division was made up of all arms grouped together in
accordance with established military practice. In those days, a division
consisted of 21,870 chariots, an equal number of elephants, thrice as many
horses and five times as many foot soldiers, and they were provided with
weapons of all kinds and other war equipment. Chariots were the
“armoured cars” of ancient warfare and elephants, specially trained for war,
corresponded to the “tanks” of modern times.
Drupada’ s brahmana messenger reached Dhritarashtra’ s court. After the
usual ceremonial introduction and enquiries were over, the messenger
addressed the assembled gathering on behalf of the Pandavas:
“Law is eternal and of inherent validity . You know this and I need not point
it out to you. Dhritarashtra and Pandu are both Vichitravirya’ s sons and are,
according to our usages, equally  entitled to their father ’s property . In spite
of this, Dhritara shtra’ s sons have taken possession of the whole kingdom,
while Pandu’ s sons are without their share of the common inheritance.
There can be no justification for this. Scions of the Kuru dynasty , the
Pandavas desire  peace. They are prepared to forget the sufferings they have
under gone and to let bygones be bygones. They are unwilling  to resort to
war, because they fully know that war never brings any good but only
destruction. Render unto them, therefore, the things that are due to them.
This would be in accordance both with justice and with the agreement
previously reached. Let there be no delay .”
After this appea l of the messeng er, the wise and brave Bhishma  spoke. “By
the grace of God” he said, “the Pandavas are safe and well. Although they
have obtained the support of many princes and are strong enoug h for battle,
they are not bent on war. They still seek peace. To restore to them their
property is the only right thing to do.”Bhishma had not finished when  Karna angrily broke in and, turning to the
messenger , exclaimed:
“O brahmana, is there anything new in what you have said? What boots it to
tell the same old story? How can Yudhishthira claim the property that he
lost at the game board? If, now, Yudhishthira wants anything, he must beg
for it as a gift! He arrogantly refers this absurd claim in fond reliance on the
strength of his allies—particularly Matsya and Panchala. Let me tell you
clearly that nothing can be got out of Duryodhana by threats. As the
plighted word, that the Panda vas should live undiscovered during the
thirteenth year, has been broken , they must once again go back to the forest
for another twelve years and return thereafter .”
Bhishma interpo sed: “Son of Radha, you speak foolishly . If we do not do as
this messenger tells us, war will be upon us in which we are certain to be
defeated; and Duryodhana and all of us are doomed to destruction.”
The disorder and excitement in the assembly made Dhritarashtra intervene.
He said to the messenger: “Having in mind the good of the world and
considering the Pandava’ s welfa re, I have decided to send Sanjaya to them.
Please return at once and tell Yudhishthira this.” Then Dhritarashtra called
Sanjaya aside and instructed him thus: “Sanjaya, go to the sons of Pandu
and convey to them my affectio nate regards and my kind enquiries about
Krishna, Satyak i and Virata. Give all the princes assembled there my
regards. Go there on my behalf and speak conciliatingly so as to secure the
avoidance of war .”
Sanjaya went to Yudhishthira on this mission of peace. After the
introductory salutations, Sanjaya thus addressed Yudhishthira in the midst
of his court:
“Dharmaputra, it is my good fortune to be able to see you again with my
eyes. Surrounded by princes, you present the picture of Indra himself. The
sight gladdens my heart. King Dhritarashtra sends you his best wishes and
desires to know that you are well and happy . The son of Ambika* detests all
talk of war . He desires your friendship and yearns for peace.”
When Dharmaputra heard Sanjaya say this, he felt glad and answered:“If so, Dhritaras htra’s sons have been saved; nay, we have all escaped a
great tragedy . I, too, desire only peace and hate war. If our kingdom is
returned to us, we will wipe out all memories of the sufferings we have
under gone.”
Sanjaya spoke again: “Dhritarashtra’ s sons are perverse. Disregarding their
father's advice and their grandsi re’s wise words, they are still as wicked as
ever, but you should not lose patience. Yudhishthira, you stand ever for
right conduct. Let us eschew the great evil of war. Can happines s be gained
with possessions obtained throu gh war? What good can we reap from a
kingdom won after killing our own relatives? Do not therefore commence
hostilities. Even if one were to gain the whole earth bounded by the ocean,
old age and death are inescapable. Duryodhana and his brothe rs are fools,
but that is no reason why you should swerve from rectitude or lose patience.
Even if they do not give back your kingdom, you should not abandon the
supreme path of dharma.”
Yudhishthira answered:
“Sanjaya, what you say is true. Rectitude is the best of possessions, but are
we committing wrong? Krishn a knows the intricacies of rectitude and
dharma. He wishes both sides well. I shall do as V asudeva orders.”
Krishna said: “I desire the welfare of the Pandavas. I desire also that
Dhritarashtra and his sons should be happy . This is a difficult matter . I think
I can settle this issue by myself going to Hastinapura. If I could obtain
peace from the Kauravas on terms which do not conflict with the welfare of
the Pandavas, nothing would make me happier . If I succeed in doing so, the
Kauravas will have been rescue d from the jaws of death. I shall also have
achieved something good and worthwhile. Even if, through a peaceful
settlement, the Pandavas get back what is due to them, they will still serve
Dhritarashtra loyally . They desire nothing else, but they are also prepared
for war if need be. Of these two alternatives, peace and war, Dhritarashtra
can choose what he pleases.”
And Yudhishthira said to Sanjaya: “Sanjaya, go back to the Kaurava court
and tell the son of Ambika this from me: ‘Was it not through your
generosity that we obtained a share of the kingdom when we were young?You, who made me a king once, should not deny us our share now and drive
us to make a beggar ’s living on the charity of others. Dear uncle, there is
enough room in the world for both of us and the Kauravas. Let there be no
antagonism, therefore, between us.’ Thus should you request Dhritarashtra
on my behalf. Give the grandsire  my love and regards and ask him to devise
some way of ensuring that his grandchildren live happily in amity. Convey
the same message to Vidura also. Vidura is the person who can best see
what is good for all of us and advise accordingly . Explain matters to
Duryodhana and tell him on my behalf: ‘My dear brother , you made us,
who were princes of the realm, live in the forest, clad in skins; you insulted
and harassed our weeping wife in the assembly of princes. We bore all this
patiently . Give us back, at least now, what is lawfully ours. Do not covet
what belongs to others. We are five. For the five of us give at least five
villages and make peace with us. We shall be content.’ Say thus to
Duryodhana, Sanjaya. I am prepared and ready for peace as well as for
war.”
After Yudhishth ira had said these words, Sanjaya took leave of Kesava and
the Pandavas, and went back to Hastinapura.
* DhritarashtraCHAPTER LIV: NOT A NEEDLE-POINT OF
TERRITORY
AFTER he had despatched Sanjaya to the Pandavas, Dhritarashtra, filled
with anxiety , could not get a wink of sleep that night. He sent for Vidura
and spent the whole night talking to him.
“To give the Pandavas their share of the kingdom is the safest plan,” said
Vidura. “Only this can bring good to both sides. Treat the Pandavas and
your own sons with equal affection. In this case, the right course is also the
wise one.”
Vidura counselled Dhritarashtra in this manner at great length.
The next morning Sanjaya retur ned to Hastinapura and gave a full account
of what had taken place in Y udhishthira’ s court.
“Chiefly , Duryo dhana should know what Arjuna said: ‘Krishn a and I are
going to destroy  Duryodhana and his followers, root and branch. Make no
mistake about it. The Gandiva is impatient for war. My bow-string is
throbbing even without my stretching it, and from my quiver , arrows keep
peeping out impatiently , deman ding when? Sanjaya, evil stars make the
foolish Duryodh ana seek war with Krishna and myself. Not even Indra and
the gods can defeat us.’ Thus spoke Dhananjaya," said Sanjaya.
Bhishma counselled Dhritarashtra against opposing the combined might of
Arjuna and Krishna. “Karna, who boasts repeatedly that he will slay the
Pandavas”, said Bhishma, “is not equal to a sixteenth part of the Pandavas.
Your sons are heading for destruction, listening to his words. When Arjuna
beat back your son’s attack on Virata’ s capital and humbled his pride, what
was Karna able to do? When the gandharvas took your son prisoner , where
did the invincible Karna hide himself? Was it not Arjuna who drove back
the gandharvas?” Thus did Bhisma taunt Karna and warn the Kauravas.
“What the pater familias  says is the only proper thing to do,” said
Dhritarashtra. “All wise men say, and I know , that it is best to seek peace.
But what can I do? These fools would go their own way, however loudly I
protest.”Duryodhana, who had been listening to all this, stood up. “Father , do not
worry and tremble about our safety. We know how strong we are. That we
shall win, is certain. Yudhishthi ra knows it too, for, giving up all hope of
kingdom, he only begs now for five villages. Is it not clear from this that he
is already scared about our eleven divisions? What can the Pandavas oppose
to our eleven divisions? Why then do you doubt our victory?” Duryodhana
said to his father and tried to cheer him up.
“My son, let us not have war ,” said Dhritarashtra. “Be satisfied with half the
kingdom. It is enough if we govern that half well.” Duryodhana could stand
it no longer . “The Pandavas will not receive even a needle-point of
territory ,” he exclaimed, and left the court. In the excitement that prevailed,
the court broke up.
Let us now relate what the Pandavas were saying among themselves. After
Sanjaya left Upaplavya for Hastinapura, Yudhishthira said to Krishna:
“Vasudeva, Sanjaya is Dhritarashtra’ s alter ego. From his speech, I have
divined what is in Dhritarashtr a’s mind. Dhritarashtra is trying to secure
peace without giving us any territory . In my simplicity , I was glad at first
when I heard Sanjaya speak, but it soon became clear that my joy was
unfounded. He then struck a middle line and spoke desiring peace, but the
words with which he ended his message seemed to commend meekness to
us, even if our just rights were denied. Dhritarashtra has not been playing
fair with us. The crisis is approa ching. There is none but you to protect us. I
made my offer that we would be content with only five villages. The
wicked Kaurava s will refuse even this. How can we tolerate this height of
intransigence? Only you can advise us in this crisis. There is none but you
who knows what our duty is now and can guide us in dharma as well as in
statesmanship.”
Krishna said in reply: “For the good of you both, I have decid ed to go to
Hastinapura. I shall go to Dhritarashtra’ s court and try to secure your rights
without war . If my mission succeeds, it will be for the good of the world.”
Yudhishthira said: “Krishna, pray do not go. What is the good of your going
to the enemies’ place now? The perverse Duryodhana will stick to his folly.
I do not like your going among those unscrupulous men. We cannot let you
jeopardise your safety , for the Kauravas will stop at nothing."Krishna answere d: “Dharmaput ra, I know how wicked Duryod hana is, but
still we should make all attempts at a peaceful solution so as to give the
world no cause to accuse us of not having done everything possible to avert
war. We must omit nothing, no matter how slender our hopes of success.
Have no fears for my safety , for, if the Kauravas offer me a messenger of
peace, any threat of bodily harm, I will reduce them to ashes!”
Said Yudhishthi ra: “You are all-knowing. You know our hearts as well as
theirs. In expou nding matters and in the art of persuasion, there is none
better than you."
Krishna said: “Yes, I know you both. Your mind ever clings to
righteousness and theirs is always steeped in hatred, jealousy and enmity . I
will do all I can to secure the result which I know is dear to you-a
settlement reached without war even though it may have but little for you.
The signs are ominous and portend war. Still duty demands that we should
make the attempt for peace.”
Thus saying, Krishna took leave of the Pandavas and set off in his chariot to
Hastinapura.CHAPTER LV: KRISHNA’S MISSION
SATYAKI accompanied Govinda* to Hastinapura. Before settin g out on his
journey , Krishna  had a long discussion with the Pandavas. Even  the mighty
Bhima, rather surprisingly , plumped for peaceful settlement. “Let not the
race be destroye d. Peace is very much to be preferred,” said he. The poet
Vyasa makes Bhima speak thus in order to show that truly great warriors
desire peace, and that to seek peace is not a sign of fear .
But Draupadi could not forget her humiliation. Holding her locks in her
hand she stood before Krishna, and in a voice quivering with grief, she said:
“Madhusudana, look at these tresses of mine and do what honour requires
to be done. There can be no peace with honour . Even if Arjuna  and Bhima
are against war, my father , old though he is, will go to battle, supported by
my children. Even my father can keep out. My children, with Subhadra’ s
son Abhimanyu, at their head, will fight the Kauravas. I have, for the sake
of Dharm aputra, these thirteen years, suppressed the burning flame of anger
within me. I can restrain myself no longer .” And she sobbed, remembering
the great outrage. Krishna was moved and said: “Weep not. Dhritarashtra’ s
sons will not listen to my words of peace. They are going to fall and their
bodies will be food for wild dogs and jackals. You will live to see us
victorious and the insult to you will be fully avenged, and that too, soon.”
Draupadi was satisfied.
Madhava halted for the night near the city of Kucasthala. When news of
Krishna’ s forth coming visit came, the city was in great excitement.
Dhritarashtra issued orders for decorating the city and arrang ements for
receiving Janardana* were in full swing. Dhritarashtra issued instructions
that Duhsasana’ s palace, being bigger and more beautiful than
Duryodhana’ s should be got ready and placed at the disposal of Krishna and
his entou rage and shamianas were erected at several places outside the city,
along the route which Krishna’ s chariot was to take.
Dhritarashtra consulted Vidura.  He said to him: “Make arrangements for
presenting Govinda with chariots and elephants. Presents of other kinds
should also be got ready .” But Vidura said: “Govinda cannot be bought with
presents. Give him that for which he is coming to the land of the Kurus.Does he not come here seeking  a peaceful settlement? Make that possible.
You cannot satisfy Madhava with other gifts.”
When Govinda reached Hastin apura, the citizens had thronged in such
numbers in the decorated street s that his chariot could only progress very
slowly . He went first to Dhritarashtra’ s palace and then proceeded to
Vidura’ s house. Kuntidevi met him there. Thinking of the sufferings of her
sons and overpowered by grief, she wept. Krishna comforted her and,
taking leave of her, made for Duryodhana’ s palace. Duryodhana gave
Govinda welcom e and invited him to dinner , but Krishna said with a smile:
“Emissaries eat only after their mission is fulfilled. You may give a feast
when my work here is completed.” Declining Duryodhana’ s invitation, he
returned to V idura’ s house where he rested.
Vidura and Krishna took counsel together . Vidura told him that
Duryodhana’ s arrogance was based on his confidence that no one could
defeat him as long as Bhishma  and Drona, who, he knew , were under a
moral obligation not to abandon him, stood by him. Vidura said that it
would be a mistake for Govinda even to enter the wicked man's court. All,
who knew Duryodhana and his brothers, apprehended that they would plot,
through fraud and deceit, against Krishna’ s life.
“What you say about Duryodha na is true. I have not come here with any
hope that I would be able to secure a peaceful settlement, but only in order
that the world might not hold me to blame. Have no fear for my life,” said
Krishna.
The next morning, Duryodhana and Sakuni came to Krishna and informed
him that Dhritarashtra was waiting for him. Govinda went to the court along
with V idura.
As Vasudeva came into the court, that great assemblage of kings stood up.
Saluting the elders with folded  hands and with a word or a smile for the
others, Krishna took his seat. The introductions over, Govinda rose from his
seat and turning to Dhritarashtra, explained the object of his visit. He made
clear what the Pandavas wanted. “Dhritarashtra, do not bring ruin to your
people. You regard as bad what is good for you and as good what is bad. It
is your duty to restrain your sons. The Pandavas are prepared for war butthey desire peace. They wish to live in happiness under you. Treat them
also as your sons and devise an honourable solution, and the world will
acclaim you,” said Krishna.
Dhritarashtra said: “My friends know that I am not to blame. I desire
precisely what Madhava has stated but I am powerless. My wicked sons do
not listen to me. Krishna, I entreat you to advise Duryodhana.”
Krishna turned to Duryodhana and said: “You are the descendant of a noble
line. Pursue the path of dharma. Your present thoughts are unworthy and
befit only men of low birth. On account of you, this famous line is in danger
of being destroyed. If you listen to reason and justice, the Pandavas
themselves will instal Dhritaras htra as king and you as the heir-apparent.
Make peace with them by giving them half the kingdom.”
Bhishma and Drona also pressed Duryodhana to listen to Govinda. But
Duryodhana’ s heart could not be softened.
“I pity Dhritarashtra and Gandhari whom Duryodhana is dooming to
bereavement and desolation by his misdeeds.” said V idura.
Dhritarashtra once again said to his son: “If you do not listen to Govinda’ s
advice, our race will perish.”
Drona and Bhishma also tried repeatedly to persuade Duryodhana and turn
him from error .
Duryodhana was furious with everyone for pressing him in this matter to
agree to a peaceful solution. He rose, and said: "Madhusudana, you wrong
me out of love for the Pandavas. The others here also blame me, but I do
not think I am one whit to blam e in this matter . The Pandavas, of their own
volition, staked their kingdom at play and, being defeated, justly forfeited it.
How am I responsible for it? Losing the game, they went to the forests as in
honour bound. For what fault of mine do they now seek battle and wish to
slay us? I will not yield to threats. When I was young, the elders did us
grievous wrong by giving the Pandavas, I do not know why, a part of the
kingdom to which they had not a shadow of a right. I acquiesced then.  But
they lost it at play. l refuse to return it to them. I am utterly blameless. I will
not give the Pandavas an inch of land, not even a needle-point of it!”When Duryodha na said that he had not committed wrong, Govi nda laughed
and said: “The play was fraudu lently arranged by you in conspiracy with
Sakuni and you afterwards insulted Draupadi in an assembly of princes, and
yet, you have the impudence to say that you have committed no wrong,”
and reminded him of the other iniquities he had perpetrated against the
Pandavas.
Duhsasana, seeing that Bhishma and others were accepting Krishna’ s
indictment of Duryodhana said: “Brother , it seems that these people have a
plot to bind you with ropes and hand you over to the Pandavas . Let us get
away from here,” and Duryodhana, accompanied by his brothers, walked
out of the court.
Govinda addressed the court again and said: “Sires, the Yadavas and
Vrishnis live happily now that Kamsa and Sisupala are dead. In order to
save a whole people, it is sometimes necessary to sacrifice an individual.
Does it not happen occasionally that a village is abandoned in order that the
country may be saved? I am afraid you will have to sacrifice Duryodhana if
you want to save your race. That is the only way .”
Dhritarashtra said to Vidura: “Bring far-sighted Gandhari here. It is possible
that Duryodhana might listen to her .”
Gandhari was sent for and, when she came to the court, Duryodhana was
sent for. Duryodhana, his eyes red with anger , returned and Gandhari tried
by all the means in her power to bring him round to reason. Duryodhana
said “No” and again walked out of the hall.
He and his frien ds had plotted to seize Krishna. News of this reached the
court. Govinda, who had anticipated all this, laughed and disclosed his
divinity .
The blind Dhritarashtra, by the grace of Krishna, temporarily regained his
sight and was able to see Krishna in his V isvarupa presence in every form.
“Pundarikaksha,* having seen your Visvarupa, I do not wish to see anything
else. I ask that I should be blind  again,” said Dhritarashtra, and he became
blind again.“All our efforts have failed. Duryodhana is obstinate,” said Dhritarashtra to
Govinda.
Arid Krishna rose and, with Satyaki and Vidura on either side of him, left
the court.
He went straight to Kunti. He told her what had happened and she asked
him to convey her blessings to her sons. “The time has come,” said she, “for
that for which a kshatriya woman brings forth sons. May you protect my
sons!”
A kshatriya mother brings forth children to be sacrificed in war.
Purushottama got into his chariot and sped towards Upaplavya. W ar became
a certainty .
* Krishna, lotus-eyed  : Krishna, Supr eme Being.CHAPTER LVI: ATTACHMENT AND DUTY
ANY ray of hope there might have been of a peaceful settlement when
Krishna went to Hastinapura was extinguished when he returned and
narrated what happened. Kunti was overwhelmed with grief when she learnt
that it was to be war to the death.
“How can I,” reflected Kunti, “give my thoughts tongue and say to my
sons, ‘Bear the insults. Let us not ask for any territory and let us avoid
war’? How can my sons accept what is contrary to kshatriya tradition?” “At
the same  time,” thought she, “what can be gained by mutual killings in the
war and what happiness attained after the destruction of the race? How shall
I face his dilemma?" Thus was she tormented by the prospect of wholesale
destruction on the one hand and the claims of kshatriya honour on the other .
“How can my sons defeat the mighty three combined, Bhishma , Drona and
Karna? They are warriors who have never yet met defeat. When I think of
them, my mind trembles. l do not worry about the others. These three are
the only people in the Kaurava army capable of fighting the Pandavas with
any hope of slaying them. Of them, Dronacharya might refrain from killing
my children from either love or unwillingness to meet one’s own disciples
in battle. The grandsire will certainly not want to kill them. But Karna is the
Pandavas’ chief  enemy . He is anxious to please Duryodhana by killing my
sons. Karna is a great man-at-a rms. As I think of him engaged in battle
against my other  sons, my heart is consumed with agony like a faggot in the
fire. Now is the time for me to seek Karna out and tell him the truth about
his birth, on knowing which, he is bound to abandon Duryodhana’ s cause. ”
Tormented by these anxious thoughts about her children. Kunti went to the
banks of the Ganga where Karna usually of fered his daily prayers.
Karna was there  at his devotio ns. Facing east and with uplifte d hands he
was in deep meditation. Kunti quietly stood behind him and waited. Karna
was in meditation and was unmi ndful of everything until he felt the hot rays
of the sun on his back.
His prayers over, Karna looked back to find Kunti standing behind him and
holding the hem of his upper garment over her head to shield  it from theburning sun. That Pandu’ s queen and the mother of the Pandava princes
should be there, waiting patiently for him to finish his prayers, filled him
with great confusion and amazement.
“The son of Radha and the chariot-driver Adhiratha bows to you. I am at
your service. What can I do for you, O queen?” asked Karna, according to
the established forms of respectful address.
“Karna,” said Kuntidevi, “you are not Radha’ s son, nor is the charioteer
your father. Do not think that you are a man of the chariot-driver ’s caste.
You are Surya’ s son born out of the womb of Pritha of royal blood,
otherwise known as Kunti. May good fortune attend you”! She then
narrated the story of his birth. “You who were born in full panoply with
amour and golden ear-rings," said Kunti, “not knowing that the Pandavas
are your brothers, have joined Duryodhana and have come to hate them. To
live in dependence on Dhritaras htra’s sons, does not befit you. Join Arjuna
and be one of the kings of the realm. May you and Arjuna put down the
wicked! The whole world will be at your feet. Your fame will reach far and
wide, like that of the brothers Balarama and Krishna. Surround ed by your
five brothers, your effulgence will be like that of Brahma among the gods.
In perplexing situations, one must do what gives satisfaction to loving
parents. This is the highest dharma according to our scriptures."
When his mother spoke thus to him at the end of his devotions to the sun,
Karna felt a sign in his heart that the Sun god endorsed Kunti’ s request, but
he checked himself and took it to mean that the Sun god was testing his
loyalty and strength of mind. He should not be found wanting.
With an effort of the will, he controlled alike the temptations of self-interest
and the prompti ngs of natural affection. He said sadly but firmly: “What
you have said, dear mother , is contrary to dharma. If I swerve from the path
of duty, I shall have done myself much more hurt than any that an enemy
might inflict on me in the battle field. You deprived me of all that was my
birthright as a kshatriya when you threw me, a helpless babe, into the river;
and now, you talk to me of my duties as a kshatriya. You denied me the
motherly love which blesses all life and now, thinking of your other
children’ s good,  you tell me this story . If I now join the Pandavas, will not
the world proclaim that I have done so out of fear? I have eaten the salt ofDhritarashtra’ s sons, won their confidence as their champion and enjoyed
all the consideration and kindne ss they showed me; and now you want me-
when the battle is about to be joined-to be untrue to my salt and go over to
the Pand avas. The sons of Dhritarashtra look on me as the ark which will
enable them to cross the deluge  of war. I have myself urged them into this
war. How can I now desert them? Could there be blacker treachery and
baser in gratitud e? What in life, or beyond it, would be worth a price like
that? Mother dear, I must disch arge my debt-aye, with life, if necessary;
otherwise, I shall be no better than a common thief purloining my food all
these years. I shall surely use all my powers against your sons in this
coming war . I cannot deceive you. Please for give me.”
“But yet,” continued he, “I cannot have my mother plead completely in
vain. Part with Arjuna to me. Either he or myself must die in this war. I will
not kill your other sons, whatever they may do unto me. Mother of warrior
sons, you will still have five sons. Either I or Arjuna will survive this war,
and with the other four sons, you will still have five”.
When Kunti heard her first-born speak thus firmly , adhering to the kshatriya
code, her heart was full of tumultuous and contrary feelings and, without
trusting herself to speak, she embraced him and departed in silence.
“Who can go against what has been ordained?” she thought. “He has, at
least, offered not to harm four of my sons. That is enough. May God bless
him”, and she returned home.CHAPTER LVII: THE PANDAVA
GENERALISSIMO
GOVINDA reached Upaplavya and told the Pandavas what had happened
in Hastinapura.
“I spoke urging what was right  and what was also good for them. But, it
was all in vain. There is now no way out except the fourth, that is, the last
alternative of war. The foolish Duryodhana would not listen to the advice
tendered to him by the elders in the assembly . We must now prepare for war
without delay . Kurukshetra is waiting for the holocaust.”
“There is no longer any hope of peace,” said Yudhishthira, addressing his
brothers, and issued orders for marshalling their forces in battle array .
They formed the army in seven  divisions and appointed Drupada, Virata,
Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin, Satyaki, Chekitana and Bhimasena at the head
of each division; they then considered who should be appointed
Generalissimo.
Addressing Sahadeva, Y udhishthira said:
“We should select one of these seven to be Supreme Com mander . He
should be one capable of succe ssfully facing the great Bhishma, who can
burn enemies to ashes. He shou ld be one who knows how to dispose his
forces as circum stances require  from time to time. Who do you think is
most fitted for this responsibility?”
In the olden days, it was the practice to ascertain the views of younger
people first, before consulting elders. This instilled enthusias m and self-
confidence in the younger folk. If the elders were consulted first, it would
not be possible for others to speak with freedom, and even honest
differences of opinion might savour of disrespect .
“Let us take as our Supreme Commander the king of Virata who helped us
when we lived in disguise and with whose support we now demand our
share of the kingdom,” replied Sahadeva.“It seem s to me best to make Drupada the Generalissimo, for, in point of
age, wisdom, courage, birth and strength he is supreme,” said Nakula.
“Drupada, the father of Draupadi, who learnt archery from Bharadwaja,
who has for long been waiting for an encounter with Drona, who is much
respected by all kings, and who is supporting us, as if we were his own
sons, should lead our army against Drona and Bhishma.”
Dharmaputra then asked Dhananjaya for his opinion.
“I think, Dhrishtadyumna shou ld be our chief in the battlefield, the hero
who has his senses under control and who has been born to bring about
Drona’ s end. Dhrishtadyumna alone can withstand the arrows of Bhishma
whose skill in archery made even the great Parasurama hold back. He is the
only man fitted to be our commander . I can think of no one else,” replied
Arjuna.
Bhimasena said:  “O king, what Arjuna says is true, but the rishis and elders
have said that Sikhandin has come into the world to kill Bhishma. My
inclination would be to give the command to Sikhandin whose radiant face
is like that of Parasurama. I do not think any one else can defeat Bhishma.”
Yudhishthira nally asked Kesava for his opinion.
“The warriors mentioned are each one of them worthy of selection,” said
‘Krishna: “Any one of them would fill the Kauravas with fear. All things
considered. I would endorse Arjuna’ s choice. Anoint Dhrishtadyumna,
therefore, as your Supreme Commander .”
Accordingly , Dhrishtadyumna, Drupada’ s illustrious son who led Draupadi
at the swayamvara and gave her away to Arjuna who for thirteen long years
was brooding over the insult that his sister had to suffer in Duryodhana’ s
court, and who was waiting for an opportunity to avenge the wrong, was
anointed Supreme Commander of the Pandava army . The lion-roar of
warriors, the blowing of conchs  and shells and the trumpeting of elephants
rent the air. With warlike cheers which made the welkin ring, the Pandava
army entered Kurukshetra in martial array .CHAPTLR LVlll: THE KAURAVA
GENERALISSIMO
BHISHMA stood in command of the Kaurava army . Duryodhana bowed
reverently to him and said:
“May it please you to lead us and achieve victory and fame even as
Kartikeya led the devas. W e will follow you as calves follow the sire-bull."
“So be it," said the grandsire. “But you should understand this—on which
my mind is without a doubt. The sons of Pandu are to me the same as you,
sons of Dhritarashtra. In fulfilment of my promise to you, I shall lead the
army and dischar ge my duty. Tens of thousands of warriors will daily fall
by my arrows on the battlefield. But, kill the sons of Pandu, I cannot. This
war has not had my approval, Short of killing the Pandavas, I shall
dischar ge all my obligations in this war .
“One thing more: the son of Surya, whom you hold dear, is opposed to my
leadership and dislikes my ideas . Should you be so minded, ask him to take
over the leadership of the army  and conduct the battle from the outset; I
shall not object”, concluded the grandsirc.
Bhishma did not like Karna and his ways.
“I will keep out as long as Bhishma is alive and come in only after he is
gone. Then, I will oppose Arjuna and kill him,” was Karna’ s boastful line.
In the old days, too, even among big men there was jealousy and envy .
Duryodhana accepted the condition laid down by Bhishma and anointed
him the Genera lissimo of his forces which rolled like a great flood into
Kurukshetra.CHAPTER LIX: BALARAMA
BALARAMA, the illustrious brother of Krishna, visited the Pandavas in
their encampment. As Halayudha*, clad in blue silk, entered majestically
like a lion, Yudhishthira, Krishna and others gave the broad-shouldered
warrior a glad welcome. Bowing to Drupada and Virata, the visitor seated
himself beside Dharmaputra.
“I have come to Kurukshetra,” said he, “learning that the descendants of
Bharata have let themselves be overwhelmed by greed, anger and hatred
and that the peace talks have broken down and that war has been declared.”
Overcome by emotion, he paused for a while and then continued:
“Dharmaputra, dreadful destruction is ahead. The earth is going to be a
bloody morass strewn with mangled bodies! It is an evil destiny that has
maddened the kshatriya world to foregather here to meet its doom. Often
have I told Krishna, ‘Duryodha na is the same to us as the Pandavas; we
may not take sides in their foolish quarrels.’ He would not listen to me. His
great affection for Dhananjaya has misled Krishna and he is with you in this
war which I see he has approved. How can Krishna and I be in opposite
camps? For Bhima and Duryod hana, both of them my pupils, I have equal
regard and love. How then can I support one against the other? Nor can I
bear to see the Kauravas destroy ed, I will therefore have nothing to do with
this war, this conflagration which will consume everything. This tragedy
has made me lose all interest in the world and so I shall wander among holy
places.”
Having thus spoken against the calamitous war, Krishna’ s brother left the
place, his heart laden with sorrow and his mind seeking consolation in God.
This episode of Balarama’ s, keeping out of the Mahabhar ata war is
illustrative of the perplexing situations in which good and hones t men often
find themselves. Compelled to choose between two equally justifiable, but
contrary , courses of action, the unhappy individual is caught on the horns of
a dilemma.
It is only honest men that find themselves in this predicament. The
dishonest ones of the earth have no such problems, guided as they are solelyby their own attachments and desires, that is, by self-interest.  Not so the
great men who have renounced all desire. Witness the great trials to which,
in the Mahabharata, Bhishma, V idura, Y udhishthira and Karna were put. W e
read in that epic how they solved their several difficulties. Their solutions
did not conform  to a single moral pattern but reflected their several
individualities. The conduct of each was the reaction of his personality and
character to the impact of circumstances. Modern critics and expositors
sometimes forget this underlying basic factor and seek to weigh all in the
same scales, which is quite wrong. We may profit by the way in which, in
the Ramayana, Dasaratha, Kumb hakarna, Maricha, Bharata and Lakshmana
reacted to the difficulties with which each of them was faced. Likewise,
Balarama’ s neutrality in the Mahabharata war has a lesson. 
Only two prince s kept out of that war. One was Balarama and the other was
Rukma, the ruler of Bhojakata. The story of Rukma, whose younger sister
Rukmini married Krishna, is told in the next chapter .
*  Another name for Balarama fr om the plough he wielded as his weapon.CHAPTER LX: RUKMINI
BHISHMAKA, the king of Vidarbha, had five sons and an only daughter ,
Rukmini, a princess of matchle ss beauty , charm and strength of character .
Having heard of Krishna and his renown, she wished to be united to him in
wedlock and the desire daily grew in intensity . Her relatives approved the
idea, all except her eldest brother Rukma, the heir-apparent, between whom
and Krishna there was no love lost. Rukma pressed his father  not to give
Rukmini in marriage to the ruler of Dwaraka but to marry her instead to
Sisupala, the king of Chedi. The king being old, Rukma’ s became the
dominant voice and it looked as though Rukmini would be compelled to
marry Sisupala.
Rukmini, whose  heart was wholly Krishna’ s because she was Lakshmi-
incarnate, was disconsolate. She feared that her father would be helpless
against her domineering brother and would not be able to prevent the
unhappy marriage. Mustering all her strength of mind, Rukmini resolved
somehow to find a way out of her predicament. She took counsel with a
brahmana whom , abandoning all maidenly reserve, she sent as her emissary
to Krishna, char ging him to explain matters to her beloved and sue for help.
The brahmana accordingly went to Dwaraka and conveyed to Krishna
Rukmini's sad plight and her entreaty , and handed to him the letter Rukmini
had sent through him. The letter ran as follows:
“My heart has already accepte d you as lord and master . I charge you
therefore to come and succour me before Sisupala carries me off by force.
The matter cannot brook any delay; so you must be here tomorrow .
Sisupala’ s forces, as well as Jarasandha’ s, will oppose you and will have to
be overcome before you can have me. May you be the triumphant hero and
capture me! My brother has decided to marry me to Sisupala and, as part of
the wedding ceremonies, I am going to the temple along with my retinue to
offer worship to Parvati. That would be the best time for you to come and
rescue me. If you do not turn up, I will put an end to my life so that I may at
least join you in my next birth.”
Krishna read this and immediately mounted his chariot.At the king’ s behest, Kundinapura, the capital of Vidarbha  was most
gorgeously decorated and prepa rations for the wedding of the princess with
Sisupala were in full swing. The bridegroom-elect and his associates, all
sworn enemies of Krishna, had already assembled in the capital.
Balarama came to know of Krishna’ s sudden and secret depar ture, all by
himself. Guessin g that it must be about the daughter of the king of Vidarbha
and anxious lest Krishna shoul d be hemmed in alone by mortal enemies
thirsting for his blood, he hurriedly assembled a great force and marched on
to Kundinapura.
Leaving her apartments, Rukmini accompanied by her retinue, went in
procession to the temple, where divine service was held.
“Oh Devi” implored Rukmini,  praying for her intercession. “I prostrate
myself before thee who know est my devotion. Grant that Krishna may
espouse me.”
Stepping out of the temple, Rukmini sighted Krishna‘s chariot and, straight
as a needle to the attracting magnet, she fled to him and got into his chariot.
And Krishna drove of f with her , to the bewilderment of all around.
The servants ran to Rukma, the heir-apparent, and related what had
happened.
“I will not retur n without killing Janardana,” swore Rukma, and went in
pursuit of Krishna with a large force. But, meanwhile, Balarama  had arrived
with his army , and a great battle ensued between the two opposi ng forces in
which the enemy was utterly routed. Balarama and Krishna returned home
in trium ph, where Rukmini’ s wedding with Krishna was celebrated with
customary rites.
The defeated Rukma was ashamed to return to Kundinapura and built at the
very site of the battle between Krishna and himself a new city, Bhojakata,
over which he ruled.
Hearing of the Kurukshetra battle, Rukma arrived there with a huge force.
Thinking that he could thereby win the friendship of Vasudeva , he offered
help to the Pandavas.“Oh Pandavas,” said he addressing Dhananjaya, “the enemy forces are very
large. I have come to help you. Give me the word and I shall attack
whichever sector of the enemy formation you would like me to. I have the
strength to attack Drona, Kripa or even Bhishma; I shall bring you victory .
Only let me know your wish.”
Turning to V asudeva, Dhananjaya laughed.
“Oh, ruler of Bhojakata,” said Arjuna, “we are not afraid of the size of the
enemy forces. We have no need  of your help and do not particu larly desire
it. You may either go away or stay on, just as you like.”
At this, Rukma was filled with anger and shame and went to Duryodhana’ s
camp with his army .
“The Pandavas have refused  my proffered assistance,” said he to
Duryodhana. “My forces are at your disposal. ”
“Is it not after the Pandavas rejected your assistance that you have come
here?” exclaimed Duryodhana, and added: “I am not in such dire need yet
as to welcome their leavings.”
Rukma, thus put to disgrace by both sides, returned to his kingd om without
taking part in battle.
Neutrality in war may be of several kinds. It may arise from conscientious
objection to war or it may be due to mere conceit and self-interests. Yet
others may keep aloof through  cowardice or sheer inertia. Balarama was
neutral in the Mahabharata war because of his love of peace. Rukma, on the
other hand, abstained as a result of his conceit. Instead of acting according
to dharma, he thought of personal glory , and neither side would have him.CHAPTER LXI: NON-CO-OPERATION
IT was the day before the commencement of the great battle. The grandsire,
now the Kaurav a Generalissimo , was with Duryodhana seeking to inspire
him with his own heroic spirit and cheerfulness. Bhishma spoke of the
strength, skill and prowess of the warriors ranged on the Kauravas’ side,
Duryodhana was cheered up. Presently , Karna became the subject of their
talk.
“Karna has earned your affection,” said Bhishma. “but I do not think much
of him. I do not like his great hatred of the Pandavas, and he is too boastful.
There is no limit to his arrogance and he is much given to disparaging
others. I would not place him in the highest rank among the warriors of the
land. Besides, he has given away the divine armour with which he was
born. He is not therefore likely to be of great help to me in this battle. The
curse of Parasurama is on him too: his command of supernatu ral weapons
will fail him in his hour of need, for he will not be able to remember the
mantras. And the battle that will ensue between him and Arjuna will prove
fatal for Karna.” Thus spoke Bhishma without mincing matters, and this
was exceedingly  unpalatable to Duryodhana and Karna. To make matters
worse. Drona agreed with the grandsire and said:
“Karna is full of pride and overconfidence which will cause  him to be
neglectful of the finer points of strategy and through carelessness, he will
suffer defeat."
Enraged by these harsh words, Karna turned to the grand-sire with flaming
eyes. “You sir,” said he, “have always slighted me through mere dislike and
envy and have never neglected an opportunity of humiliating me, though I
gave you no reason. I bore all your taunts and thrusts for the sake of
Duryodhana. You have said that I would not be of much help in the
impending war. Let me tell you my settled conviction, it is you-not I -who
will fail the Kauravas. Why hide your real feelings? The fact of the matter
is that you have no genuine affection for Duryodhana, but he does not know
it. Hatin g me, you seek to come between me and Duryodhana and poison
his mind against me. And in furtherance of your wicked design, you have
been belittling my strength and running me down. You have stooped tobehaviour unwo rthy of a kshat riya. Age alone does not confer a title to
honour and respect among warriors, but prowess does. Desist from
poisoning our relations.”
Turning then to Duryodhana, Kama said:
“Illustrious warrior, think well and look to your own good. Do not place too
great a reliance  on the grandsi re. He is trying to sow dissension in our
ranks. His appraisement of me will injure your cause. By running me down,
he seeks to damp my enthusiasm . He has become senile and his time is up.
His arrogance does not let him have regard for any one else. Age must be
respected and experience is useful but as the sastras warn us, there is a point
when age becomes senility and ripeness falls into rottenness and decay . You
have made Bhishma your Gene ralissimo who will, I have no doubt, earn
some fame from the heroic deeds of others, but I will not bear arms while
he is in command. Only after he has fallen will I do so.”
The arrogant man is never conscious of his own arrogance. When accused
of it, he charges the accuser with that very fault. His judgmen t is warped
and he considers it a crime on the part of any one to point out his defect.
This is well illustrated in this episode .
Controlling his anger , Bhishma replied: “Son of Surya, we are in a crisis
and that is why you have not ceased to live this moment. You have been the
evil genius of the Kauravas.”
Duryodhana was in distress.
“Son of Ganga, I need the help of you both,” he said. “You will both do
deeds of great heroism, I have no doubt. At break of dawn, the battle joins.
Let there be no fighting among friends, with the foe in full force before us!”
But Karna was adamant in that he would not take up arms so long as
Bhishma was in supreme command. Duryodhana eventually yielded to
Karna and suffered him to carry out his threat. Karna kept out during the
first ten days of the battle, though all his men participated in it. At the end
of the tenth day, when the great  Bhishma lay on the battlefield covered all
over with arrows, Karna went to him and bowed reverently and asked for
forgiveness and blessings, which he received. Thereafter , Karna co-operatedand himself proposed Drona for the command of the Kaurav a forces in
succession to Bhishma.
When Drona also fell, Karna took over the command and led the Kaurava
forces.CHAPTER LXII: KRISHNA TEACHES
ALL was ready for the battle. The warriors on both sides gathe red together
and solemnly bound themselves  to honour the traditional rules of war. The
code of conduct in war and meth ods of warfare vary from time to time. It is
only if what was in vogue at the time of the Mahabharata war is kept in
mind that we can understand the epic. Otherwise, the story would be
puzzling in places.
From what follows, the reader may have some idea of the rules  of warfare
followed in Kurukshetra battle. Each day, the battle was over at sunset, and
the hostiles mixed freely like friends. Single combats might only be
between equals and one could not use methods not in accordance with
dharma. Thus those who left the field or retired would not be attacked. A
horseman could attack only a horseman, not one on foot. Likewise,
charioteers, elephant troops and infantrymen could engage themselves in
battle only with their opposite numbers in the enemy ranks. Those who
sought quarter or surrendered were safe from slaughter . Nor might one, for
the moment disengaged, direc t his weapons against another who was
engaged in combat.
It was wrong to slay one who had been disarmed or whose attention was
directed elsewhe re or who was retreating or who had lost his armour . And
no shafts were to be directed against non-combatant attendan ts or those
engaged in blowing conchs or beating drums.
These were the rules which the Kauravas and the Pandavas solemnly
declared they would follow .
The passage of time has witnes sed many changes in men’ s ideas of right
and wrong. Noth ing is exempt from attack in modern warfare. Not only are
munitions made the target of attack but dumb animals such as horses,
camels, mules and medical stores, nay, non-combatants of all ages, are
destroyed without compunction.
Sometimes the established conventions went overboard even in the
Mahabharata war. We see clearly in the story that occasional transgressions
took place for one reason or another but, on the whole, the accepted rules ofhonourable and humane war were observed by both sides in the
Kurukshetra battle and the occasional violations were looked upon as
wrong and shameful.
Addressing the princes under his command, Bhishma said: “Heroes, yours
is a glorious opportunity . Before you, are the gates of heaven wide open.
The joy of living with lndra and Brahma awaits you. Pursue the path of
your ancestors and follow the kshatriya dharma. Fight with joy and attain
fame and greatness. A Kshatriya does not wish to die of diseas e or old age
in his bed but prefers to die on the battlefield,” and the prince s responded
by ordering their trumpets to be sounded and shouted victory to the
Kauravas.
On Bhishma’ s flag shone brightly the palm tree and five stars. On
Aswatthama’ s the lion tail fluttered in the air. In Drona’ s golden-hued
standard, the ascetic’ s bowl and the bow glistened, and the cobra of
Duryodhana’ s famed banner danced proudly with outspread hood. On
Kripa’ s flag was depicted a bull while Jayadratha’ s carried a wild boar.
Likewise others, and the battlefield thus presented a pageant of flags.
Seeing the Kaurava forces ranged in battle array , Yudhishthira gave orders
to Arjuna:
“The enemy force is very large. Our army being smaller , our tactics should
be concentration  rather than deployment which will only weaken us. Array
our forces, therefore, in needle formation.”
Now , when Arjuna saw men arrayed on both sides for mutual slaughter , he
was deeply agitated and Krishna spoke to him in order to quell his agitation
and remove his doubts. Krishna ’s exhortation to Arjuna at this juncture is
the Bhagavad Gita which is enshrined in millions of hearts as the Word of
God, and is ackn owledged by all as one of the supreme treasures of human
literature. Its gospel of devotion to duty, without attachment or desire of
reward, has shown the way of life for all men, rich or poor, learned or
ignorant, who have sought for light in the dark problems of life.CHAPTER LXIII: YUDHISHTHIRA SEEKS
BENEDICTION
EVER YTHING was ready for the battle to begin. At this tense moment,
both armies saw with amazemen t Yudhishthira, the steadfast and brave son
of Pand u, suddenly doff his armour and put away his weapons and,
descending from  his chariot, proceed on foot towards the commander of the
Kaurava forces. “What is this that Yudhishthira is doing?" asked everyone
and was puzzled by this sudde n and silent proceeding on the part of the
Pandava.
Dhananjaya too was perplexed and he jumped down from his chariot and
ran to Yudhishthira. The other  brothers and Krishna also joined. They
feared that perhaps Yudhishthira, surrendering to his natural inclination, had
suddenly decide d to seek peace  on any terms and was going forward to
announce this.
"King, why are you proceeding to the enemy’ s lines in this stran ge manner?
You have told us nothing. The enemy is ready for battle, their soldiers
sheathed in armour and with uplifted weapons, but you have doffed your
armour and thrown aside your weapons and are proceeding forward,
unattended and on foot. Tell us what you are about.” Thus said Arjuna to
Dharmaputra. But Yudhishthira was immersed in deep thought and
proceeded forward silently . Then Vasudeva, who knew the hearts of men,
smiled and said: “He is going to the elders to ask for their benediction
before commencing this terrible fight. He feels it is not right to start such a
grave proceeding without formally taking such benediction and permission.
He goes to the grandsire to take his blessing and that of Dronacharya. So he
goes unarmed. It is right that he does this. He knows proprietie s. It is only
thus that we might fare well in this battle. ”
The men in Duryodhana’ s army , when they saw Yudhishthira  advancing
with hands clasped in humble attitude, thought: “Here is the Pandava
coming to sue for peace frightened at our strength. Truly this man brings
disgrace to the race of kshatriyas. Why was this coward born among us?”Thus did they talk among themselves reviling Dharmaputra though
delighted at the prospect of securing victory without a blow .
Yudhishthira went through the lines of soldiers armed cap-a-pie and
proceeded straig ht to where Bhishma was and, bending low and touching
his feet in salutation, said:
“Grandsire, permit us to begin the battle. We have dared to give battle to
you, our unconquerable and incomparable grandsire; we seek benediction
before beginning the fight.”
“Child,” replied the grandsire, “born in the race of Bharatas, you have acted
worthily and according to our code of conduct. It gives me joy to see this.
Fight and you will have victory . I am not a free agent. I am bound by my
obligation to the king and must fight on the side of the Kauravas. But you
will not be defeated.”
After thus obtaining the permission and the blessings of the grandsire,
Yudhishthira went to Drona and circumambulated and bowed, according to
form, to the acharya, who also gave his blessings, saying:
“I am under inescapable obligations to the Kauravas, O son of Dharma. Our
vested interests enslave us and become our masters. Thus have I become
bound to the Kauravas. I shall fight on their side. But yours will be the
victory ."
Yudhishthira similarly approached and obtained the blessings of
Kripacharya and uncle Salya and returned to the Pandava lines .
The battle began, commencing  with single combats between the leading
chiefs armed with equal weapons. Bhishma and Partha, Satyaki and
Kritavarma, Abhimanyu and Brihatbala, Duryodhana and Bhima,
Yudhishthira and Salya, and Dhrishtadyumna and Drona were thus engaged
in great  battles. Similarly , thousands of other warriors fought severally
according to the rules of war of those days.
Besides these numerous single combats between renowned warriors, there
was also indiscriminate fightin g among common soldiers. The name of
“sankula yuddha” was given to such free fighting and promiscuous carnage.The Kurukshetra battle witnessed many such “sankula” fights wherein
countless men fought and died in the mad lust of battle, and on the field lay
piles of slaughtered soldiers, charioteers, elephants and horses, and the
ground became a bloody mire in winch it was difficult for the chariots to
move about. In modern battles there is no such thing as single combats. It is
all “sankula.”
The Kauravas fought under Bhishma’ s command for ten days. After him,
Drona took the command. When Drona died, Karna succeeded to the
command. Karna fell towards the close of the seventeenth day’s battle, and
Salya led the Kaurava army on the eighteenth and last day .
Towards the latter part of the battle, many savage and unchivalrous deeds
were done. Chiv alry and rules of war die hard, for there is an innate nobility
in human nature, but difficult situations and temptations arise  which men
are too weak to resist, especially when they are fordone with fighting and
warped with hatred and bloodshed. Even great men commit wrong and their
lapses thereafter  furnish bad examples to others, and dharma comes to be
disregarded more and more easily and frequently . Thus does violence beget
and nourish adharma  and plunge the world in wickedness.CHAPTER LXIV: THE FIRST DAY'S BATTLE
DUHSASANA was leading the Kaurava forces and Bhimasena did the
same on the Pandava side. The noise of battle rolled and rent the air. The
kettledrums, trumpets, horns and conchs made the welkin ring with their
clamour . Horses neighed, charging elephants trumpeted and the warriors
uttered their “lion-roars.” Arrows flew in the air like burning meteors.
Fathers and sons, uncles and nephews slew one another forgetful of old
affection and ties of blood. It was a mad and terrible carnage.
In the forenoon of the first day’s battle the Pandava army was badly shaken.
Wherever Bhish ma’s chariot went, it was like the dance of the destroyer .
Abhimanyu could not bear this and he attacked the grandsire. When the
oldest and the youngest warriors thus met in battle, the gods came to watch
the combat. Abhimanyu’ s flag, displaying the golden karnikara tree brightly
waved on his chariot. Kritavarm a was hit by one of his arrows and Salya
was hit five times. Bhishma himself was hit nine times by Abhimanyu’ s
shafts. Durmukha’ s charioteer was struck by one of Abhimanyu’ s sword-
edge arrows and his severed head rolled on the ground. Another broke
Kripa’ s bow. Abhimanyu’ s feats brought down showers of flowers from the
gods who looked on. Bhishma and the warriors supporting him exclaimed:
“Indeed, a worthy son to Dhananjaya!”
Then the Kaurav a warriors made a combined attack on the valiant youth but
he stood against them all. He parried with his own all the shafts dischar ged
by Bhishma. One of his well-a imed arrows brought the grandsire’ s palm
tree flag down and, seeing this, Bhimasena was overjoyed and made a great
lion-roar which further inspired the valiant nephew .
Great was the grandsire’ s joy, seeing the valour of the young hero.
Unwillingly , he had to use his full strength against the boy. Virata, his son
Uttara, Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Drupada and Bhima came to relieve the
young hero and attacked the grandsire who then turned his attentions on
them. Uttara, the son of Virata, rode an elephant and led a fierce charge on
Salya. Salya’ s chariot horses were trampled to death and thereupon he
hurled a javelin at Uttara. It went with unerring aim and pierced him in the
chest. The goad  he had in his hand dropped and he rolled down dead. Butthe elephant did not withdraw . It continued charging until Salya cut off its
trunk and hit it in many places with his arrows, and then _it uttered a loud
cry and fell dead. Salya got into Kritavarma’ s car.
Virata’ s son Sveta saw Salya slay his younger brother . His anger rose, like
fire fed by libati ons of butter , and he drove his chariot towards Salya. Seven
chariot warriors  at once came up in support of Salya and protected him
from all sides. Arrows were showered on Sveta and the missiles sped across
like lightning in clouds. Sveta defended himself marvellously . He parried
their shafts with his own and cut their javelins down as they sped towards
him. The warriors in both armies were amazed at the skill displayed by
Sveta. Duryodhana lost no time now and sent forces to relieve Salya,
whereupon there was a great battle. Thousands of soldiers perished, and
numerous were the chariots broken and the horses and elephants killed.
Sveta succeeded  in putting Duryodhana’ s men to flight and he pushed
forward and attacked Bhishma. Bhishma’ s flag was brought down by Sveta.
Bhishma, in his turn, killed Sveta’ s horses and charioteer . Thereupon, they
hurled javelins at one another and fought on. Sveta took a mace, and
swinging it, sent it at Bhishma’ s car which was smashed to pieces. But the
grandsire even before the mace dashed against the chariot, had anticipated it
and jumped down, and, from the ground he pulled the string of his bow to
his ear and sent a fatal arrow at Sveta. Sveta was struck and fell dead.
Duhsasana blew  his horn and danced in joy. This was followed by a great
attack on the Pandava army by Bhishma.
The Pandava forces suffered greatly on the first day of the battle.
Dharmaputra was seized with apprehension, and Duryodhana’ s joy was
unbounded. The brothers came to Krishna and were engaged in anxious
consultations.
“Chief among Bharatas,” said Krishna to Yudhishthira, “do not fear. God
has blessed you with valiant brothers. Why should you entertain any
doubts? There is Satyaki and there are V irata, Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna
besides myself. What reason is there for you to be dejected? Do you forget
that Sikhandin is awaiting for his predestined victim Bhishma?” Thus did
Krishna comfort Y udhishthira.CHAPTER LXV: THE SECOND DAY
THE Pandava army , having fared badly on the first day of the battle,
Dhrishtadyumna, the Generalissimo, devised measures to avoid a repetition
of it. On the second day, the army was most carefully arrayed and
everything was done to instil confidence.
Duryodhana, filled with conceit on account of the success on the first day,
stood in the centre of his army and addressed his warriors.
“Heroes in armour ,” he said in a loud voice, “our victory is assured. Fight
and care not for life.”
The Kaurava army , led by Bhishma, again made strong attack on the
Pandava forces and broke their formation, killing lar ge numbers.
Arjuna, turning to Krishna, his charioteer , said: “If we continue  in this way,
our army will soon be totally destroyed by the grandsire. Unless we slay
Bhishma, I am afraid we cannot save our army .”
“Dhananjaya, then get ready . There is the grandsire’ s chariot,” replied
Krishna, and drove straight towards him.
The chariot sped forward at a great pace. The grandsire sent his shafts
welcoming the challenge. Dury odhana had ordered his men to protect the
grandsire most vigilantly and never to let him expose himsel f to danger .
Accordingly , all the warriors, supporting the grandsire, at once intervened
and attacked Arjuna who, however , fought on unconcerned.
It was well know n that there were but three on the Kaurava side who could
stand against Arjuna with any chance of succe ss - the grandsire Bhish ma,
Drona and Karna. Arjuna made short work of the warriors, who intervened
in support of Bhishma. The way in which he wielded his great bow on this
occasion, extorted the admiration of all the great generals in the army . His
chariot flashed hither and thither sundering hostile ranks like ‘forked
lightning-so rapidly that the eye ached to follow its career .
Duryodhana’ s heart beat fast as he watched this combat. His confidence in
the great Bhishma began to be shaken.“Son of Ganga,” Duryodhana said, “it seems as if even while you and
Drona are alive and fighting, this irresistible combination of Arjuna and
Krishna will destroy our entire army . Karna whose devotion and loyalty to
me are most genuine stands aside and does not fight for me only because of
you. I fear I shall be deceived and you will not take steps quickly to destroy
Phalguna*.”
The gods came down to watch the combat between Bhishma and Arjuna.
These were two of the greatest warriors on earth. Both chariots were drawn
by white  steeds. From either side flew arrows in countless number . Shaft
met shaft in the air and sometimes the grandsire’ s missile hit Arjuna’ s
breast and that of Madhava** and the blood flowing made Madhava more
beautiful than ever as he stood like a green palasa tree in full bloom with
crimson flowers. Arjuna’ s wrath  rose when he saw his dear charioteer hit
and he pulled his bow and sent well-aimed arrows at the grandsire. The
combatants were equal and the battle raged for a long while. In the
movements the chariots made they were so close to one another and moved
about so fast that it was not possible to say where Arjuna was and where
Bhishma. Only the flag could be distinguished.
As this great and wonderful scene was enacted in one part of the field, at
another place a fierce battle was being fought between Drona and his born
enemy Dhrishtadyumna, the son of the king of the Panchalas and brother of
Draupadi. Drona’ s attack was powerful and Dhrishtadyumna was wounded
badly . But the latter retaliated with equal vigour and with a grin of hatred he
shot arrows and sped other missiles at Drona. Drona defended himself with
great skill. He parried the sharp missiles and the heavy maces hurled at him
with his arrows and broke them to pieces even as they sped in the air. Many
times did Dhrishtadyumna’ s bow break, hit by Drona’ s arrows. One of
Drona’ s arrows killed the Panchala prince's charioteer . Thereupon
Dhrishtadyumna took up a mace and, jumping down from the chariot, went
forward on foot. Drona sent an arrow which brought the mace down.
Dhrishtadyumna then drew his sword and rushed forward like a lion
springing on its elephant-prey . But Drona again disabled him and prevented
his advance. Just then Bhima who saw the Panchala’ s predicament sent a
shower of arrows on Drona and carried Dhrishtadyumna to safety in his
chariot.Duryodhana who saw this sent the Kalinga forces against Bhimasena.
Bhima killed the Kalinga warriors in great number . Like Death itself he
moved about among his enemies and felled them to the ground. So fierce
was the destruction that the entire army trembled in fear .
When Bhishma saw this, he came to relieve the Kalingas. Satyaki,
Abhimanyu and other warriors  came up in support of Bhima. One of
Satyaki’ s shafts brought Bhishma’ s charioteer down and the horses of
Bhishma’ s chariot, left uncontrolled, bolted carrying Bhishma away from
the field. The Pandava army was wild with enthusiasm when Bhishma’ s
chariot sped thus out of the field. They took adva ntage of the situation and
made a fierce attack on the Kaurava army . Great was the loss the Kaurava
army suffered in that day’s battle as a result of Arjuna’ s deed s of valour .
The generals of the Kaurava army were greatly perturbed and their previous
day’s enthusiasm had all disappeared. They eagerly looked forward to
sunset when there would be an end to the day’ s battle.
As the sun sank in the west, Bhishma said to Drona: “It is well we stop the
fighting now . Our army is disheartened and weary .”
On the side of the Pandavas, Dhananjaya and others returned in great cheer
to their camp, with bands playin g. At the end of the second day’s battle, the
Kauravas were in the mood that the Pandavas were in the previo us evening.
* Phalguna - Arjuna
** Madhava – KrishnaCHAPTER LXVI: THE THIRD DAY'S BATTLE
ON the morning of the third day, Bhishma arrayed his army in eagle
formation and himself led it while Duryodhana and his forces protected the
rear. So great was the care taken over every detail that the Kauravas were
certain that there could be no mishap for them that day .
The Pandavas too arrayed their forces with skill. Dhananjaya and
Dhrishtadyumna decided in favour of a crescent formation of their army so
as more effectually to cope with the eagle formation of the enemy's forces.
On the right horn of the cresc ent stood Bhima and on the left Arjuna,
leading the respective divisions.
The battle began. All arms were at once engaged and blood flowed in
torrents and the dust that was raised by chariots, horses and elephants rose
to hide the sun. Dhananjaya’ s attack was powerful but the enemy stood
firm.
A counter -attack was made by the Kauravas concentrating on Arjuna’ s
position. Javelins and spears and other missiles flew in the air shining like
forked lightning in a thunderstorm. Like a great cloud of locusts the shafts
covered Arjuna’ s chariot, but with amazing skill he raised a moving
fortification around his chariot, with arrows dischar ged in an unending
stream from his famous bow .
At another point Sakuni led a large force against Satyaki and Abhimanyu.
Satyaki’ s chariot was broken to shivers and he had to scramble up
Abhimanyu's chariot and thereafter both fought from the same chariot. They
were able to destroy Sakuni‘s forces .
Drona and Bhishma jointly attacked Dharmaputra’ s division and Nakula
and Sahadeva joined their brother in opposing Drona’ s offensive.
Bhima and his son Ghatotkacha attacked Duryodhana’ s division and in that
day’s battle the son appeared to excel his great father in valour. Bhima’ s
shafts hit Duryodhana and he lay in swoon in his chariot. His charioteer
quickly drove the chariot away from the scene fearing that the forces would
be comp letely demoralised if they saw that the prince had been disabled.
But even this movement creat ed great confusion. Bhimasen a took fulladvantage of the position and worked havoc among the fleeing Kaurava
forces. Drona and Bhishma who saw the discomfiture and confusion of the
Kaurava army came up quickly and restored confidence. The scattered
forces were brought together and Duryodhana was again seen leading them.
“How can you stand thus,” said Duryodhana to the grandsire, “looking on
when our forces are scattered and put to disgraceful flight? I fear you are
too kind to the Pandavas. Why did you not tell me frankly ‘I love the
Pandavas; Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki are my friends and I cannot attack
or slay them? You should have stated the position explicitly to me. Surely
these men are not equal to you, and if you were so minded, you could deal
with them easily . Even now, it would be best if you and Drona told me
frankly your mind in the matter .”
The chagrin of defeat, and the knowledge that the grand sire disapproved of
his ways  made Duryodhana speak thus bitterly , but Bhishma merely smiled
and said: “Wasn’t I quite frank in my advice to you? That advice you
rejected when you decided on war. I tried to prevent the war but, now that it
has come, I am fulfilling my duties by you with all my might. I am an old
man and what I am doing is quite my utmost. ”
Saying thus, the grandsire resumed his operations. The turn of events in the
forenoon had been so much in their favour that the delighted Pandavas were
now somewhat careless. They did not expect Bhishma to rally his forces
and attack them  again. But, stung by Duryodhana’ s reproaches, the
grandsire raged about the field like a destroying fire. He rallied his men and
delivered the most severe attack  yet made on the Pandava army . The latter
thought that the grandsire had multiplied himself into a number of
Bhishmas fighting at several points: so swift were his movements that
afternoon. Thos e who opposed him were struck down and perished like
moths in the fire. The Pandava army was thoroughly broken and began to
scatter . Vasudeva, Partha and Sikhandin tried hard to restore order and
confidence, but were unsuccessful. “Dhananjaya,” said Krishna, “now has
the critic al time come. Be true to your decision not to flinch from your duty
to kill in battle Bhishma, Drona and all the other friends and relatives and
respected elders. You have pledged yourself to it and you have now to carryit out. Otherwise our army is lost beyond redemption. You must now attack
the grandsire.”
“Drive on,” said Arjuna.
As Dhan anjaya’ s chariot sped on towards Bhishma, it met a hot reception
from the grandsire, who covered it with his arrows. But, Arjuna bent his
bow and dischar ged three shafts which broke the grandsire’ s bow. Bhishma
picked up another bow but it too met the same fate. The grandsire’ s heart
was gladdened when he saw Arjuna’ s skill in archery .
“Hail, brave warrior!” applaude d the grandsire, even as, taking up another
bow, he poured shafts on Arjuna’ s chariot with unerring aim.
Krishna was not happy at the way Arjuna met the attack. The grandsire’ s
how was working fiercely , but Arjuna’ s hands did not do their best, for his
heart was not in it. He had too much regard for his great grandsire.
Krishna thought that, if Arjuna went on like this, the army , which had been
so badly demoralized already , would be utterly destroyed and all would be
lost. Krishna managed the chariot skilfully , but in spite of it, both he and
Arjuna were hit many times by Bhishma’ s arrows.
Janardana’ s* anger rose. “I can stand this no longer , Arjuna. I shall kill
Bhishma myself if you will not do it!” he exclaimed, and dropping the
reins, he took up his discus and jumped down from the chariot and dashed
forward towards Bhishma.
Bhishma was far from being perturbed at this. On the contrary , his face
expanded with ecstatic joy. “Come, come, Oh Lotus-eyed One!” he
exclaimed. “I bow to you, Oh Madhava. Lord of the World, have you
indeed come down from the chariot for my sake? I offer you my life. If I be
slain by you, I shall be glorified in the three worlds. Give me that boon.
May your hands take this life away and save me for eternity .”
Arjuna was distressed to see this. He jumped down and ran after Krishna.
Overtaking him with great dif ficulty , he entreated Krishna to turn back.
“Do not lose your patience with me. Desist and I promise not to flinch,” he
said, and persuaded Krishna to return. The chariot reins were again in
Krishna’ s hands. Arjuna attacked the Kaurava forces furiously andthousands were slain by him. The Kauravas suffered a severe defeat on the
evening of the third day. As they returned to their camps in torch light, they
said to one anoth er: “Who can equal Arjuna? There is nothing strange in his
being victorious.” So marvellous was Arjuna’ s prowess that day .
* KrishnaCHAPTER LXVII: THE FOURTH DAY
THE battle was very much the same every day and the narrative is one of
monotonous fighting and killing. Still, the great battle is the central event in
the Mahabharata  and, if we skip over it, we cannot fully underst and the epic
heroes of that crowded stage.
At break of day, Bhishma arrayed the Kaurava forces again. Surrounded by
Drona, Duryodhana and others, the grandsire looked verily like great Indra,
holding his thunderbolt surroun ded by the devas. The Kaurava  army , with
its chari ots, elephants and horses all arrayed in battle order and ready for
the fight, presented the appearance of the sky in a great thunderstorm.
The grandsire gave orders for advance. Arjuna watched the hostile
movements from  his chariot, whereon the Hanuman flag was waving, and
he too got ready . The battle commenced. Aswatthama, Bhurisravas, Salya,
Chitrasena and the son of Chala  surrounded Abhimanyu and attacked him.
The warrior fought like a lion opposing five elephants. Arjuna saw this
combined attack  on his son and, with a wrathful lion-roar joined his son
whereat the tempo of fighting flared up. Dhrishtadyumna also arrived with
a large force. The son of Chala  was killed. Chala himself now joined and
he, with Salya, made a strong attack on Dhrishtadyumna. The latter ’s bow
was severed into two by a sharp missile dischar ged by Salya. Abhimanyu
saw this and sent a shower of arrows on Salya and put him in such danger
that Duryodhana  and his brothers rushed to Salya’ s help. Bhim asena also
appeared on the scene at this juncture. When Bhima raised his mace aloft,
Duryodhana’ s brothers quailed. Duryodhana, who saw this, was
exceedingly angry and immediately charged against Bhima with a large
force of elephan ts. As soon as Bhima saw the elephants coming up, he
descended from  his chariot, iron mace in hand, attacked them  so fiercely
that they scattered in a wild stampede, throwing the Kaurava  ranks into
disorder . It will be seen that even in our Puranic stories elepha nts fared as
badly in battle as they did in the wars of the Greeks and the Romans.
Bhima’ s attack on the elephants was like Indra’ s devastating onslaught on
the wing ed mountains. The slaughtered mammoths lay dead on the field
like great hills. Those that escap ed fled in panic and caused great havoc inthe Kaurava army , trampling numerous soldiers in their wild career .
Duryodhana, thereupon, ordered a wholesale attack on Bhima, but he stood
firm as a rock and presently , the Pandava warriors came up and joined him.
A number of Duryodhana’ s arrows struck Bhima’ s chest and he climbed up
his chariot again.
“Visoka, now is the glad hour,” said Bhima to his charioteer . “I see a
number of Dhritarashtra’ s sons before me, ready to be shaken  down like
ripe fruits on a tree. Keep your hold well on the reins and drive on. I am
going to despatch these wretches to Y ama’ s abode.”
Bhima's arrows would have killed Duryodhana then and there, had it not
been for his armour . Eight of Duryodhana’ s brothers were slain in that day’s
battle by Bhima. Duryodhana fought fiercely . Bhima’ s bow was smashed by
one of Duryodh ana’s arrows. Taking up a fresh bow, Bhima sent an arrow
with a knife edge at Duryodhana which cut the latter ’s bow into two. Not
baffled by this, Duryodhana took up a fresh bow and dischar ged a well-
aimed shaft which struck Bhima  on his chest with such force that he reeled
and sat down. The Pandava warriors now poured a great shower of arrows
on Duryodhana.  Ghatotkacha, who saw his father sit dazed with the force of
the blow, got exceedingly angry  and fell on the Kaurava army , which was
unable to stand against his onslaught.
“We cannot fight this rakshasa today ,” said Bhishma to Drona. “Our men
are weary. It is nearing sunset and the might of the rakshasas grows with the
darkness. Let us deal with Ghatotkacha tomorrow .”
The grandsire ordered his army to retire for the night. Dury odhana sat
musing in his tent, his eyes filled with tears. He had lost many of his
brothers in that day’ s battle.
“Sanjaya,” excla imed Dhritarashtra, “every day, you give me nothing but
bad news. Your tale has ever been one of sorrow-of defeat and loss of dear
ones! I cannot stand this any more. What stratagem can save my people?
How are we going to win in this fight? Indeed, I am full of fear. It seems
fate is more powerful than human ef fort.”
“King,” said Sanjaya in reply , “is this not all the result of your own folly?
Of what avail is grief? How can I manufacture good news for you? Youshould hear the truth with fortitude.”
“Ah! Vidura’ s words are coming true,” said the blind old king, plunged in
great grief.CHAPTER LXVIII: THE FIFTH DAY
“I am like a shipwrecked man seeking to save himself by swimming in a
storm-tossed ocean. I shall surely drown, overwhelmed in this sea of
sorrow .”
Again and again, when Sanjaya related the happenings of the great battle,
Dhritarashtra would thus lament, unable to bear his grief.
“Bhima is going to kill all my sons,” he said. “I do not believe there is
anyone with prowess enough in our army to protect my sons from death.
Did Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Aswatthama look on unconcerned when
our army  fled in terror? What indeed is their plan? When and how are they
going to help Duryodhana? How are my sons to escape from destruction?”
Saying thus, the blind old king burst into tears.
“Calm yourself,  King,” said Sanjaya. “The Pandavas rest on the strength of
a just cause. So, they win. Your sons are brave but their thoughts are
wicked. Therefore, luck does not favour them. They have done great
injustice to the Pandavas, and they are reaping the harvest of their sins. The
Pandavas are not winning by charms or magic incantations . They are
fighting accordin g to the practic e of kshatriyas. Their cause being just, they
have strength. Friends advised you, but you discarded wise counsel. Vidura,
Bhishma, Drona and tried to stop you in your unwise course, but you did
not listen and you went on. Like a foolish sick man who refuses to drink
bitter medicine, you obstinately  refused to follow our advice, which would
have saved your people, preferring to do as your foolish son desired. You
are in distress now. Last night, Duryodhana asked Bhishma the same
question as you put to me now, and Bhishma gave the same answer as I
give you.”
When the fighting was stopp ed on the evening of the fourth day,
Duryodhana went by himself to Bhishma’ s tent and, bowing reverently ,
said:
“Grandsire, the world knows that you are a warrior who knows not fear.
The same is the case with Drona, Kripa, Aswatthama, Kritavarma,
Sudakshin, Bhurisravas, Vikarna and Bhagadatta. Death has no terror forthese veterans. There is no doubt, the prowess of these great warriors is
limitless, even like your own. All the Pandavas combined canno t defeat any
one of you. What then is the mystery behind this daily defeat of our army at
the hands of the sons of Kunti?”
Bhishma replied : “Prince, listen to me. I have given you advice on every
occasion and told you what was good for you. But, you have always refused
to follow  what your elders coun selled you to do. Again, I tell you that it is
best for you to make peace with Pandu’ s sons. For your good as well as for
that of the world , that is the only course that should be followed. Belonging
to the same royal house, you can all enjoy this vast country as yours. I gave
you this advice, but you disregarded it and have grievously wronged the
Pandavas, the fruit of which you are now reaping. The Pandavas are
protected by Krishna himself. How then can you hope for victory? Even
now, it is not too late for making peace and that is the way to rule your
kingdom, makin g the Pandavas, your powerful brothers, friends instead of
enemies. Destru ction awaits you if you insult Dhananjaya and Krishna, who
are none other than Nara and Narayana.”
Duryodhana took leave and went to his tent, but he could not sleep that
night .
The battle was resumed the next morning. Bhishma arrayed the Kaurava
forces in a strong formation; so did Dhrishtadyumna, the Pandava army .
Bhima stood at the head of the advance lines as usual, and Sikhandin,
Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki stood behind, securely guarding the main
body , aided by other generals. Dharmaputra and the twin brothers held the
rear. Bhishma bent his bow and dischar ged his shafts. The Pandava army
suffered greatly under the grandsire’ s attack. Dhananjaya saw this and
retaliated by fierce shafts aime d at Bhishma. Duryodhana went to Drona
and complained  bitterly according to his wont. Drona upbraided him
severely: “Obstinate prince, you talk without understanding. You are
ignorant of the Pandavas’ strength. We are doing our best.” Drona’ s
powerful attack on the Pandava army was too much for Satyaki who was
meeting it and Bhima, therefore turned his attentions to Drona. The battle
grew fiercer still. Drona, Bhish ma and Salya made a combine d attack on
Bhima. Sikhand in supported Bhima by pouring a shower of arrows onBhishma. As soon as Sikhandin stepped in, Bhishma turned away , for
Sikhandin was born a girl, and Bhishma’ s principles did not permit him to
attack a woman. In the end, this same objection proved to be the cause of
Bhishma’ s death. When Drona saw Bhishma turn away , he attacked
Sikhandin fiercely and compelled him to withdraw .
There was a promiscuous battle the whole of the forenoon of the fifth day,
and the slaughter was terrific. In the afternoon, Duryodhana sent a large
force to oppose Satyaki. But Satyaki destroyed it completely and advanced
to attack Bhurisravas. Bhurisra vas, who was a powerful opponent, put
Satyaki’ s men to fight, and pressed Satyaki himself so fiercely that he was
in distress. Satyaki’ s ten sons saw their father ’s plight and sought to relieve
him by launching an offensive against Bhurisravas, but Bhurisravas
undaunted by numbers, oppose d the combined attack and was not to be
shaken. His well-aimed darts broke their weapons and they were all slain,
strewn on the field like so many tall trees struck down by lightning. Satyaki,
wild with rage and grief, drove forward at a furious pace to slay
Bhurisravas. The chariots of the two warriors dashed against each other and
crumbled to pieces and the warriors stood face to face with sword and
shield in desperate single combat. Then, Bhima came and took away
Satyaki by force into his chariot and drove away , for Bhima knew that
Bhurisravas was an unrivalled swordsman and he did not want Satyaki to be
slain.
Arjuna killed thousands of warriors that evening. The soldiers, despatched
against him by Duryodhana, perished like moths in the fire. As the sun went
down and Bhishma gave orders to cease fighting, the princes on the
Pandava army surrounded Arjuna and greeted him with loud cries of
admiration and victory . The armies on both sides retired to camp along with
the tired horses and elephants.CHAPTER LXIX: THE SIXTH DAY
ACCORDING to Yudhishthira’ s order Dhrishtadyumna arrayed the
Pandava army in makara* formation for the sixth day’s battle. The Kaurava
army was arrayed in krauncha+ formation. “W e know , how , similarly , names
are given to physical exercise, asanas, or postures. Vyuha was the general
name for battle array . Which vyuha was best for any particular occasion,
depended on the requirements of the offensive and defensive plans of the
day. What the strength and composition of the forces arrayed should be and
what positions they should take up were decided upon, accor ding to the
situation as it developed from time to time.
The sixth day was marked by a prodigious slaughter , even in the first part of
the morning. Drona’ s charioteer was killed and Drona took the reins of the
horses himself and used his bow as well. Great was the destruction he
effected. He went about like fire among cotton heaps. The formations of
both armies were soon broken and indiscriminate and fierce fighting went
on. Blood flowed in torrents and the field was covered by dead bodies of
soldiers, elephants and horses and the debris of chariots.
Bhimasena pierced the enemy’ s lines to seek out Duryodhana’ s brothers and
finish them. They , for their part, did not wait to be sought, but rushed on
him, in a combined attack from all sides. He was attacked by Duhsasana,
Durvishaha, Durmata, Jaya, Jayatsena, Vikarna, Chitrasena, Sudarsana,
Charuchitra, Suvarma, Dushkarna and others, all together . Bhimasena, who
did not know what fear was, stood up and fought them all. They desired to
take him prisoner and he to kill them all on the spot. The battle raged
fiercely , even like the ancient battle between the gods and the asuras.
Suddenly , the son of Pandu lost his patience and jumped down from his
chariot, mace in hand, and made straight on foot for the sons of
Dhritarashtra, in hot haste to slay them.
When Dhrishtadyumna saw Bhima’ s chariot disappear in the enemy lines,
he was alarmed and rushed to prevent disaster . He reached Bhima’ s car, but
found it was occupied only by the charioteer and Bhima was not in it. With
tears in his eyes, he asked the charioteer: “Visoka, where is Bhima dearer to
me than life?” Dhrishtadyumna naturally thought Bhima had fallen.Visoka bowed and said to the son of Drupada: “The son of Pandu asked me
to stay here and, without waiting for my reply rushed forward on foot, mace
in hand, into the enemy ranks.” Feairing that Bhima would be overpowered
and killed, Drish tadyumna drove his chariot into the enemy lines in search
of Bhimasena, whose path was marked by the bodies of slain elephants.
When Dhrishtadyumna found Bhima, he saw him surrounded on all sides
by enemies fighting from their chariots. Bhima stood against them all, mace
in hand, wounded all over and breathing fire. Dhrishtadyumna embraced
him and took him into his chari ot and proceeded to pick out the shafts that
had stuck in his body .
Durvodhana now ordered his warriors to attack Bhimasena and
Dhrishtadyumna and, not to wait for them to attack or challenge.
Accordingly , they made a combined attack even though they were not
inclined to engage themselves in further fighting.Dhrishtadyumna had a
secret weapon, which he had obtained from Dronacharya and, dischar ging
it, threw the enemy forces into a stupor . But Duryodhana then joined the
fray and dischar ged weapon s to counter the stupor weapons of
Dhrishtadyumna. Just then, reinforcements sent by Yudhishthira arrived. A
force of twelve chariots with their equipage led by Abhimanyu came upon
the scene to support Bhima. Dhrishtadyumna was greatly reliev ed when he
saw this. Bhima sena had also by now refreshed himself and was ready to
renew the fight.  He got into Kekaya’ s chariot and took it his position along
with the rest.
Drona, however , was terrible that day. He killed Dhrishtadyumna’ s
charioteer and horses and smas hed his chariot and Drupada’ s son had to
seek a place in Abhimanyu’ s car. The Pandava forces began to waver and
Drona was cheered by the Kaurava Army .
Indiscriminate mass fighting and slaughter went on that day. At one time,
Bhima and Duryodhana met face to face. The usual exchange of hot words
took place and was followed by a great battle of archery . Duryodhana was
hit and fell unconscious. Kripa extricated him with great skill and took him
away in his own chariot. Bhishma personally arrived at the spot now and
led the attack and scattered the Pandava forces.  The sun was sinking, butthe battle was continued for an hour yet and the fighting was fierce and
many thousands perished.
Then the day’s battle ceased. Yudhishthira was glad that Dhrishtadyumna
and Bhima returned to camp alive.
* A Fabulous fish with horned head.
+ A her onCHAPTER LXX: THE SEVENTH DAY
DUR YODHANA, wounded all over and suflering greatly , went  to Bhishma
and said:
“The battle had been going against us every day. Our formations are broken
and our warriors are being slain in large numbers. You are looki ng on doing
nothing.”
The grandsire soothed Duryodhana with comforting words:
“Why do you let yourself be disheartened? Here are all of us- Drona, Salya,
Kritavarma, Aswatthama, Vikarna, Bhagadatta, Sakuni, the two brothers of
Avanti, the Trigarta chief, the king of Magadha, and Kripacharya. When
these great warriors are here, ready to give up their lives for you, why
should you feel downhearted? Get rid of this mood of dejection.”
Saying this, he issued orders for the day .
“See there,” the grandsire said to Duryodhana, “These thousands of cars,
horses and horsemen, great war elephants, and those armed foot soldiers
from various kingdoms are all ready to fight for you. With this fine army ,
you can vanquish even the gods. Fear not.”
Thus cheering up the dejected Duryodhana, he gave him a heali ng balm for
his wounds. Duryodhana rubbe d it over his numerous woun ds and felt
relieved. He went to the field, heartened by the grandsire’ s words of
confidence. The army was that day arrayed in circular formation. With each
war elephant were seven chariots fully equipped. Each chariot was
supported by seven horsemen. To each horseman were attached ten shield
bearers. Everyone wore armour .
Duryodhana stood resplendent like Indra at the centre of this great and well-
equipped army .
Yudhishthira arrayed the Pandav a army in vajravyuha. This day’s battle was
fiercely fought simultaneously at many sectors. Bhishma  personally
opposed Arjuna‘s attacks. Dron a and Virata were engaged with each other
at another point. Sikhandin and Aswatthama fought a big battle at another
sector . Duryodh ana and Dhrishtadyumna fought with each other at yetanother point. Nakula and Sahad eva attacked their uncle Salya. The Avanti
kings opposed Yudhamanyu, while Bhimasena opposed Kritavarma,
Chitrasena, Vikama and Durmarsha. There were great battles between
Ghatotkacha and Bhagadatta, between Alambasa and Satyaki, between
Bhurisravas and Dhrishtaketu,  between Yudhishthira and Srutayu and
between Chekitana and Kripa.
In the battle betw een Drona and Virata, the latter was worsted and he had to
climb into the chariot of his son Sanga, having lost his own chariot, horses
and charioteer . Virata’ s sons Uttara and Sveta had fallen in the first day’s
battle. On this seventh day, Sanga also was slain just as his father came up
to his side. Sikhandin, Drupada’ s son, was defeated by Aswatthama. His
chariot was smashed and he jumped down and stood sword and shield in
hand. Aswatthama aimed his shaft at his sword and broke it. Sikhandin then
whirled the broken sword and hurled it at Aswatthama with tremendous
force, but it was met by Aswatt hama’ s arrow . Sikhandin, badly  beaten, got
into Satyaki’ s chariot and retired. In the fight between Satyaki and
Alambasa, the former had the worst of it at first but later recovered ground
and Alambasa had to flee.
In the battle between Dhrishtadyumna and Duryodhana, the horses of the
latter were killed and he had to alight from his chariot. He, however ,
continued the fight, sword in hand. Sakuni came then and took the prince
away in his chariot. Kritavarm a made a strong attack on Bhima but was
worsted. He lost his chariot and horses and acknowledging defeat, fled
towards Sakuni’ s car, with Bhima’ s arrows sticking all over him, making
him look like a porcupine speeding away in the forest.
Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti were defeated by Yudhamanyu, and their
armies were completely destroy ed. Bhagadatta attacked Ghato tkacha and
put to flight all his supporters. But, alone, Ghatotkacha stood  and fought
bravely , but in the end, he too had to save himself by flight, which
gladdened the whole Kaurava army .
Salya attacked his nephews. Nakula’ s horses were killed and he had to join
his broth er in the latter ’s chariot. Both continued the fight from the same
car. Salya was hit by Sahade va’s arrow and swooned. The charioteer
skilfully drove the car away and saved Salya.When the Madr a king* was seen retreating from the field Duryodhana’ s
army lost heart and the twin sons of Madri blew their conchs  in triumph
and, taking advantage of the situation, inflicted heavy damage  on Salya’ s
forces.
At noon , Yudhishthira led an attack on Srutayu. The latter ’s well-aimed
arrows intercepted Dharmaputra’ s missiles, and his armour was pierced and
he was severely wounded. Yudhishthira then lost his temper and sent a
powerful arrow which pierced Srutayu’ s breast-plate. That day,
Yudhishthira was not his normal self and burnt with anger . Srutayu’ s
charioteer and horses were killed and the chariot was smashed and he had to
flee on foot from the field. This completed the demoralisation of
Duryodhana’ s army .
In the attack on Kripa, Chekitana, losing his chariot and charioteer , alighted
and attacked Kripa’ s charioteer and horses with mace in hand  and killed
them. Kripa also alighted, and standing on the ground, discharged his
arrows. Chekitana was badly hit. He then whirled his mace and hurled it at
Kripacharya, but the latter was able to intercept it with his own arrow .
Thereupon, they closed with each other , sword in hand. Both were wounded
and fell on the ground, when Bhima came and took Chekitana away in his
chariot. Sakuni similarly took wounded Kripa away in his car .
Ninety-six arrows of Dhrishtake tu struck Bhurisravas, and the great warrior
was like a sun radiating glory , as the arrows, all sticking in his breast-plate,
shone bright around his radiant face. Even in that condition, he compelled
Dhrishtaketu to admit defeat and retire.
Three of Duryodhana’ s brothers  attacked Abhimanyu who inflicted a heavy
defeat on them but spared their lives, because Bhima had sworn to kill
them. Thereupon, Bhishma attacked Abhimanyu.
Arjuna saw this and said to his illustrious charioteer: “Krishna, drive the car
towards Bhishma.”
At that moment , the other Pand avas also joined Arjuna, but the grandsire
was able to hold his own against all five until the sunset and the battle was
suspended for the day, and the warriors of both sides, weary and wounded,
retired to their tents for rest and for having their injuries attend ed to. Afterthis, for an hour, soft music was played, soothing the warriors to their rest.
That hour was spent, says the poet, without a word about war or hatred and
was an hour of heavenly bliss, and it was a glad sight to see. One can see
herein what the great lesson of the Mahabharata is.
* Salya.CHAPTER LXXI: THE EIGHTH DAY
WHEN the eighth day dawne d, Bhishma arrayed his army in tortoise
formation. Y udhishthira said to Dhrishtadyumna:
“See there, the enemy is in kurma vyuha. You have to answer at once with a
formation that can break it.”
Dhrishtadyumna immediately proceeded to his task. The Pandava forces
were arrayed in a three-pronged formation. Bhima was at the head of one
prong, Satyaki of another , and Yudhishthira at the crest of the middle
division. Our ancestors had developed the science of war well. It was not
reduced to writing but was preserved by tradition in the families of
Kshatriya. Armo ur and tactics were employed suitably to meet the weapons
of of fence and the tactics which the enemy used in those days.
The Kurukshetr a battle was fought some thousands of years ago. Reading
the story of the battle in the Mahabharata, we should not, having the
practice and incidents of modern warfare in mind, reject the Mahabharata
narrative as mere myth with no relation to fact. Only about a century and a
half ago, the English admiral Nelson fought great sea battle s and won
undying renown. The weapons used and the vessels that actual ly took part
in Nelson’ s battles, would seem almost weird and even ridiculous if
compared with those of modern  naval warfare. If a hundred and fifty years
can make so much difference, we must be prepared for very strange things
in the procedure and events of a period, so long back as that of the
Mahabharata war .
Another matter to be kept in mind is that we cannot expect. In the books of
poets and literar y writers, accurate or full details about weapons and tactics,
although the narrative may be of battles. Military affairs were  in ancient
times the sole concern of the military order , the kshatriyas. Their culture
and their training were entirely  their own charge. The principles and the
secrets of warfare and the science and art of the use of military weapons
were handed down from generation to generation by tradition and personal
instruction. There were no military text-books and there was not much
place for them in the works of poets and rishis. If a modern novel deals insome chapters with the treatm ent and cure of a sick person, we cannot
expect to see such details in it as might interest a medical man. No author
would care, even if he were able, to include scientific details in his story .
So, we cannot hope to find in the epic of Vyasa, precise details as to what is
tortoise formation or lotus formation. We have no explanation as to how
one could, by dischar ging a continuous stream of arrows, build a defence
around himself or intercept and cut missiles in transit, or how one could be
living when pierced all over by arrows, or how far the armour worn by the
soldiers and officers could protect them against missiles or what were the
ambulance arran gements or how the dead were disposed of. All these things
appertaining to ancient war, however interesting, will have to be in the
realm of the unknown in spite of the vivid narrative we have in the
Mahabharata epic.
Bhima killed eight of Dhritarashtra’ s sons early in the battle that day.
Duryodhana’ s heart quailed before this. It seemed to his friends as if
Bhimasena would complete his revenge this very day, even as he swore in
the assembly hall, where the great outrage was enacted. Arjuna  had a great
bereavement in this day’s battle. His dear son Iravan was killed. This son of
Arjuna by his Naga wife had come and joined the Pandava forces at
Kurukshetra. Duryodhana sent his friend, the rakshasa Alambasa, to oppose
the Naga warrior . Iravan was slain after a fierce fight. When Arjuna heard
this, he broke down completely . Said he turning to Vasudeva: “Vidura had
indeed told us plainly that both sides would be plunged in grief  unbearable.
What are we doing all this wretched destruction upon one another for? Just
for the sake of property . After all this killing, what joy are we or they likely
to find in the end? O Madhusudana, I now see why the far-seeing
Yudhishthira said he would be content if Duryodhana would give five
villages to us, keeping everything else to himself and he would not resort to
fighting if that were agreed to. Duryodhana, in his obstinate folly, refused to
give even these five villages and so, these great sins have to be committed
on both sides. I continue fightin g only because men would otherwise think
me a coward, who could submit tamely to wrong. When I see the dead
warriors lying on the field, my heart is filled with unbearable anguish. Oh,
how wicked we are to carry on in this miserable, sinful way!”Seeing Iravan killed, Ghatotkacha uttered a loud war -cry which made all the
assembled soldiers tremble, and with his division, fell upon the Kaurava
army ferociousl y. So great was the destruction he wrought that at many
points the Kaurava formation was broken. Seeing this, Duryodhana
personally led an attack on Bhima’ s son. The king of Vanga joined
Duryodhana with his elephants. Duryodhana fought most bravely on this
eighth day of the battle. He killed a great number of warriors on
Ghatotkacha’ s side. Ghatotkacha hurled a javelin which would have ended
Duryodhana’ s career but for the Vanga chief ’s prompt intervention with one
of his elephants. The missile hit the beast which fell dead and Duryodhana
was saved.
Bhishma was anxious about Duryodhana and sent a large force under Drona
to support the Kaurava prince. Many were the veterans who were in this
force that attack ed Ghatotkacha . So tumultuous and fierce was the fight at
this sector of the battle that Yudhishthira feared for Ghatotkacha’ s safety
and sent Bhima sena in his aid. Then the battle became even fiercer than
before.
Sixteen of Duryodhana’ s brothers perished on this day .CHAPTER LXXII: THE NINTH DAY
ON the morning of the ninth day, before the battle began. Duryodhana was
closeted with the grandsire. He gave vent to his bitter feelings of
disappointment over the way the battle was going. He uttered words which
were like the sharp spears and pained the grandsire greatly but the latter was
patient, and said sadly:
“Like ghee on the sacrificial fire I am pouring my life out for you.Why do
you seek to mortify me, who have been doing my very utmost for you? You
speak like a man of no understanding, not knowing what is right and what is
wrong. They say that, when a man is nearing his death, the tree appears to
him to be made of gold. You see things now, not as they are; your vision is
clouded. You are now reaping the harvest of the hatred you deliberately
sowed. The best course for you is to go on fighting, as well as you can. This
is also the plain path of duty. It is not possible for me to fight Sikhandin, for
I can never raise  my hand again st a woman. Nor can I with my hands kill
the Pandavas, for my mind revolts against it. I will do everything barring
these two and fight all the warriors opposed to you. Nothing is gained by
losing heart. Fight as a kshatriya should and honour will be yours whatever
the events.”
Saying thus to Duryodhana and cheering him up with wise and affectionate
words, Bhishma proceeded to issue instructions for arraying the forces for
the day’ s battle.
Duryodhana was heartened. He sent for Duhsasana and said to him:
“Brother , put forth all our strength in today’ s battle. I am convinced, the
grandsire is fighting on our side with his whole heart. It is only against
Sikhandin, he says, he cannot use his weapons. We should see that he is not
exposed to Sikhandin’ s attacks, for you know , even a wild dog can kill a
lion if the latter scorns to fight back.”
There was a great fight betwee n Abhimanyu and Alambasa. Abhimanyu
demonstrated that his valour was no less than his illustrious father ’s.
Alambasa had to flee on foot to save himself.There were fierce combats between Satyaki and Aswatthama and between
Drona and Arjuna. Thereafter , all the Pandavas attacked the grandsire and
Duryodhana sent Duhsasana to support the old warrior . Bhishma fought
furiously and beat the Pandavas  back. The Pandava forces were  thoroughly
demoralised and were flying hither and thither , like cattle that had lost their
way in the forest.
Krishna halted the chariot and said to Arjuna: “Partha, you and your
brothers were looking forward to this day, after thirteen years. Do not
hesitate to kill the grandsire. Remember the duty of a soldier .”
Arjuna bent his head down and, without looking up, replied: “I would much
rather have continued to be an exile in the forest than kill the grandsire and
the teachers whom I love, but I shall obey you. Drive on.”
Arjuna’ s heart was not in the fight. Unwillingly and in great distress of
mind, he proceeded to the combat. Bhishma, on the other hand, burnt
fiercely like the noonday sun.
When the army saw Arjuna’ s chariot proceed towards Bhishma , it regained
courage and order once again prevailed. Bhishma’ s arrows came thick and
fast and covered the advancing chariot so completely that neither horses nor
vehicles could be seen. Krishna was unperturbed and drove on with
circumspection and skill. Arjuna ’s shafts hit Bhishma’ s bow and shattered it
many times. But the grandsire went on renewing his weapon .
“You are not fighting, Arjuna, as you should!” exclaimed Krishna, and
jumped down in a rage from the chariot and, taking up his discus, he
advanced towards the grandsire.
Bhishma saw V asudeva approaching.
“Hail, O Lotus-eyed One!" he cried. “Blessed am I to be separat ed from the
body by you! Come, come!”
Arjuna jumped down from the chariot and, rushing forward overtook and
held Krishna, casting both his arms round him. “Stop, Krishna,” he cried.
“Do not break your pledge. You have promised not to use weapons in this
battle. This is my work. I shall not fail. I shall send my arrows and kill the
beloved grandsire myself. Pray , mount the car and take the reins.”Arjuna took Krishna back and the battle was resumed. The Pandava forces
had been handled roughly , but now the sun was down in the west and the
fighting ended for the day .CHAPTER LXXIII: THE PASSING OF BHISHMA
IT was the tenth day of the battle. Keeping Sikhandin in front of him.
Arjuna attacked Bhishma. When Sikhandin’ s darts pierced his breast, sparks
flew from the grandsire’ s eyes. For a moment the old wanior ’s anger rose
like flaming fire and his eyes glared as if to consume Sikhandin. But, at
once, the grands ire restrained himself. He decided not to be provoked into
lighting Sikhand in, who was born a woman and to strike whom it seemed
unworthy of a warrior . He knew , however , his end was near and calmed
himself. Sikhandin went on dischar ging his arrows, not minding the battle
of emotions in his opponent’ s mind. Arjuna also steeled his heart, and from
behind Sikhandi n aimed arrows at the weak points in Bhishm a’s armour ,
even while the grandsire stood still.
Bhishma smiled  as the arrows continued to come down thick on him, and
turning to Duhsasana, said: “Ah, these are Arjuna’ s arrows! These cannot
be Sikhandin’ s, for they burn my flesh as the crab’ s young ones tear their
mother ’s body .” Thus did the grandsire look upon his dear pupil’ s arrows
and, while sayin g this to Duhsasana, he took up a javelin and hurled it at
Arjuna. Arjuna met it with three arrows which cut it to pieces, even as it
was speeding through the air. Bhishma then decided to end the combat and
made as if to dismount from his chariot, sword and shield in hand, but
before he could do so, his shield  was cut to pieces by Arjuna’ s arrows. With
arrows sticking all over his body so thickly that there was not even an inch
of intervening space, Bhishma fell headlong to the ground from  his chariot.
As he fell, the gods, who looked on from above, folded their hands in
reverent salutation and a gentle breeze, laden with fragrance and cool
raindrops, swept over the battlefield .
Thus fell the great and good Bhishma, the son of Ganga- Ganga , who came
on earth to hallow it and all it bears. The blameless hero who, unasked
made the great renunciation to give joy to his father , the undefeated
bowman who had humbled the pride of Rama of the axe, the selfless worker
for righteousne ss sake, thus repaid his debt to Duryodhana, and lay
wounded to death sanctifying with his life-blood the battlefi eld. As the
grandsire fell, the hearts of the Kauravas also fell along with him.Bhishma’ s body did not touch the ground, on account of the arrows sticking
out all over his body . His body shone more brightly than ever before, as it
lay as on a bed of honour , supported by the shafts that had pierc ed his flesh.
Both armies ceased fighting and all the warriors came running and crowded
round the great hero, who lay on his bed of arrows. The kings of the earth
stood with bowed heads round him, as the gods round Brahma.
“My head bangs down unsupported,” said the grandsire.
The princes who stood near, ran and brought cushions. The old warrior
rejected them with a smile and, turning towards Arjuna said: “Dear son
Partha, give me a cushion befitting a warrior .”
When Arjuna, whose arrows were just then bunting the grandsire’ s flesh,
heard those words addressed to him, he took three arrows from out of his
quiver and so placed them that the grandsire’ s head found support on their
points.
“Princes,” said Bhishma addressing the assembled chiefs, “Arjuna’ s arrows
were indeed what my head required to be supported on. This pillow gives
me satisfaction. Now , I must lie thus until the sun turns north. My soul will
not depart till then. When I pass away , those of you who may be alive then
may come and see me. ”
Then the grands ire turned again to Arjuna and said: “I am torm ented with
thirst. Get me some drinking water .”
At once, Arjuna raised his bow, and drawing it to the ear, shot a shaft down
into the earth near the grandsire  on his right side. Up the openi ng made by
the arrow , there gushed a stream  of pure sweet water to the very lips of the
dying man. Ganga came up, says the poet, to quench her dear son’s burning
thirst. Bhishma drank and was happy .
“Duryodhana, may you be wise!” said Bhishma addressing the Kaurava
prince. “Did you see how Arjuna brought me water to quench  my thirst?
Who else in this world can do such a deed? Make peace with him without
further delay. May the war cease with my exit. Listen to me, son, make
peace with the Pandavas.”The grandsire’ s words did not please Duryodhana. Even when dying, the
patient does not like medicine. He objects to the bitter taste.
All the princes retired to their camps.CHAPTER LXXIV: KARNA AND THE
GRANDSIRE
WHEN he learnt that Bhishma lay wounded and dying, Karna hurried to the
place and fell at his feet and said:
“Eldest of the race, Radha’ s son, who through no fault of his, incurred your
great displeasure, humbly prostrates himself before you.”
When after humble salutation Karna stood up, the grandsire, greatly moved,
tenderly placed his hand on Karna’ s head and blessed him. “You are not
Radha's son, young man,” he said in loving tones. “You are Kuntidevi’ s
own first born. Narada, who knows all the secrets of the world, himself
revealed this to me. Son of Sury a, truly I entertained no dislike for you. But
I was grieved to see your incre asing hatred of the Pandavas although they
gave you no cause for it. I know and admire your valou r and your
openhandedness, and I know also that you belong to the class of Phalguna
and Krishna in prowess. It is meet you befriend the Pandavas. Therein lies
the right  path for you who are their brother . With the closing of my part in
this war, may the chapter of your enmity also close. This is my wish,
Karna.”
Karna listened respectfully and replied: “Grandsire, I know I am Kunti's
son, and not charioteer -born. But I have eaten Duryodhana’ s salt and must
be true to him, to be true to my own lineage. It is impossible for me to go
over to the Pand avas now. You must permit me to repay with my life, if it
so be, the debt I owe to Duryo dhana for his love and trust. I have erred
greatly in word and deed. You must forgive me for it all and give me your
blessings.”
The great achary a, who knew all the laws of right conduct, reflected for a
while on what Karna said, and replied: “Do then as you wish, for that is the
right way .”
Even when Bhishma was mortally wounded and lay dying, the battle did
not cease. Disregarding the grandsire’ s words of wisdom, the Kauravas
resumed the battle.Deprived of Bhishma’ s leader ship, the Kaurava forces felt like sheep
without a shepherd when Bhishma no longer led them. Indeed, even as
Bhishma fell wounded, the men shouted:
“O Karna, you are the one left to lead and protect us.”
The Kaurava warriors felt that, if but Karna would agree to take up the
command, victory was certain. During the first ten days when Bhishma led
the force s, the son of Surya kept away from the battle. As already narrated,
deeply hurt at the grandsire’ s contumely , Karna had said “So long as you
are up fighting, I shall keep aloof. If you slay the Pandavas and bring
victory to Duryodhana, I shall be glad; and I shall then taking the king’ s
leave, go to the forest. But, if you be defeated and go to the abode of the
brave, I, who am not deemed by you as an adhiratha* will ride my chariot
and oppose those whom you deem to be of greater prowess than myself
and, defeating them, bring victory to Duryodhana.”
Thus had Karna sworn and, with Duryodhana’ s consent, kept aloof from the
battle during the first ten days. Now he went on foot to Bhishma  who lay on
his bed of arrows waiting for his end and, saluting him, addressed him thus:
“Veteran grandsire, vanquisher of Parasurama, you lie on the field of battle,
struck down by Sikhandin. If you, who had reached the summit of right
living and were  an embodiment of purity itself, must lie wounded in this
manner , it is clear that no one can attain in this world what he deserves by
his merit. You were the one boat on which the Kaurava prince s depended
for crossing the flood of their troubles. Heavy indeed will be the blows
which the Pandavas will now deal at the Kauravas and great will be their
consequent distress. Like tire and wind burning down the forest, Arjuna and
Krishna will destroy the army of Kauravas. This is certain.  Turn your
gracious eyes on me and bless me, who have accepted the command of the
forces.”
Bhishma gave his blessings to Karna. “You are like the good earth to the
seeds, like rain clouds to living beings, ever dependable, firm in your
loyalty . Serve Duryodhana and save him. You vanquished the Kambojas for
him. You put down the Kiratas of the Himalayan fastnesses for him. You
fought the Girivrajas on his behalf and defeated them. Many more thingsyou have accomplished for him. Take charge of the Kaurava army now as
your own rich possession and guard it well. May you lead Duryodhana’ s
forces to success! May you have every good fortune! Fight your enemies,
go.”
Karna, having received the benediction of the grandsire, mounted his
chariot and rode to the battlefield. When the valorous Karna entered the
field on his war chariot, Duryodhana’ s joys knew no bounds. His sorrow , at
having lost Bhishma, was in some degree alleviated.
* Master of chariot warfar e.CHAPTER LXXV: DRONA IN COMMAND
Duryodhana and Karna held counsel as to who should be put in supreme
command of the forces.
“Well, every one of these princely warriors fighting on your side is great
enough to be put in charge of our forces as supreme comm ander ,” said
Karna. “All these kings are of equal prowess, strength, energy, skill,
courage, valour , ancestry and wisdom. They cannot all be put in joint
command and, if any of them be chosen, each of the others would feel hurt
and may not put forth his whole strength in the cause. Thereby we stand to
suffer. So, my advice is that we install Dronacharya, the teacher  of all these
princes and warriors, as supreme commander . He indeed is the greatest of
all those that carry arms today . No kshatriya equals him in the qualities
required for leading our army . Let us therefore install him.”
Duryodhana agreed that this was the right thing to do, and so it was
decided.
Duryodhana went to Dronacharya and, in the presence of the assembled
warriors and princes, bowed and addressed him”:
“Revered Master , you are unrivalled among all those assembled here in
caste, ancestry , knowledge of sciences, age, wisdom, valour and skill. I beg
of you to accep t the supreme command. Under your command , this army
will be victorious."
The assembled kings received this proposal with loud cheers and war cries
which gladdened Duryodhana‘s heart,
Drona was installed in due form amidst thunderous acclamation. The praise
of court iers and the sound of trumpets that accompanied the ceremony ,
made the Kaura vas feel as though they had already vanquished the enemy .
So great was their enthusiasm and confidence in Drona‘s leadership .
Drona arrayed the army in circular formation. Karna, who had till then
stood aside was now seen moving about in his great chariot on the
battlefield and this put new courage and joy into the hearts of the Kaurava
soldiers. The talk went round in the army that the great Bhish ma did notwish to slay the sons of Pandu and therefore had not put his whole heart in
the fight, but now that Karna was in the field, it was certain that the
Pandavas would be destroyed.
Dronacharya was in command for five days of the battle. Though of
advanced years, he was everywhere in the field and displayed the fierce
energy of a young warrior . Whenever he led an attack, the Pandava forces
were scattered like clouds before a storm. He personally engaged the
greatest warriors  on the Pandav a side in battle. He fought Satyaki, Bhima,
Arjuna, Dhrishta dyumna, Abhim anyu, Drupada and Kasiraja and defeated
them on many occasions. He harassed and inflicted severe punishment on
the Pandava army during the five days he was in command.CHAPTER LXXVI: TO SEIZE YUDHISHTHIRA
ALIVE
As soon as Drona assumed command of the Kaurava forces, Duryodhana,
Karna and Duhs asana sat in council and decided on a plan, and Duryodhana
went to Dronacharya to put it in operation.
“Acharya, we desire that you should capture Yudhishthira alive and give
him over to us. We desire nothing more, not even a total victory. If you
achieve this for us, we shall all be exceedingly satisfied with your conduct
of the war .”
When Drona heard Duryodhana  address him thus, great was his joy, for he
hated the very idea of slaying the Pandava brothers. Even though, to fulfil
his obligation, the acharya loyally joined the Kaurava side against the
Pandavas, he loved the sons of Kunti and especially the pure-minded
Yudhishthira. So, when he heard Duryodhana request that Yudhishthira
should be captured alive, he felt greatly relieved.
“Duryodhana, may you be bless ed!” the acharya said. “Do you too wish to
abstain from killing Yudhishthira? How it gladdens my heart! Truly,
Yudhishthira is one without an enemy and the name Ajatasatru , which the
people have given to Kunti’ s eldest son, has been justified by your great
decision. When even you have made up your mind that he should not be
killed but should be captured alive, his unrivalled glory has become ten
times enhanced.”
“I see, dear Duryodhana, what you intend," Drona continued. “You wish to
defeat the Pandavas in battle and then give them their share in the kingdom
and live in peace  and amity with them. I see this clearly from your desire to
capture Y udhishthira alive.”
Drona was exceedingly glad and he said again: “Indeed Yudhishthira is the
most fortunate man on earth. The gods are showering their favours on
Kunti’ s good son. So has he won the hearts of even enemies.”
But Duryodhana ’s motives in wishing to take Yudhishthira alive were far
different, and as soon as Drona acceded to his proposal and gave his pledgethat he would do his best to capture Y udhishthira, he began to reveal his real
intentions.
If Yudhishthira were slain, nothing would be gained by it, and the anger of
the Pandavas would be all the greater . The battle would rage more fiercely
than before, and Duryodhana knew that it would only mean the utter defeat
of his army . Even if the fight were to be continued relentlessly until both
armies were destroyed, Krishna would still remain alive and he would put
either Draupadi  or Kunti in sovereign possession of the kingdom. What
then was the point in killing Yudhishthira? On the other hand, if
Yudhishthira was captured alive Duryodhana thought, the war would end
more speedily and victoriously for the Kauravas. Thereafter , he could surely
play on Yudhish thira’ s goodnes s and his loyalty to the traditional code of
kshatriya conduc t. It was pretty certain he could be drawn into the battle of
dice again and sent to the forests once more. Ten days of fighting had
demonstrated to Duryodhana that further fighting would only result in the
destruction of the race, not the fulfillment of the desires. When Duryodhana
made his motives clear to Drona, the acharya was greatly disappointed and
he curse d Duryo dhana in his heart. But whatever the reason for it, he was
glad that Y udhishthira was not to be killed.
The news that Drona had given a solemn assurance to Duryodhana that he
would take Yudhishthira prisone r, was carried by their spies to the Pandava
army . The Pandavas knew that, when the acharya was determined on
something and gave his pledg ed word for executing it, his unrivalled
eminence in the art of war and his valour made it a most serious affair. So,
they soon got busy and so arrayed the forces that Yudhishthira was never
left unsu pported. Whatever movements might take place, they always took
care to leave sufficient protection against any surprise attack on
Yudhishthira.
In the first day’s battle under the leadership of Drona, the acharya amply
demonstrated his great skill and energy. He moved about destroying the
Pandava forces like a fire burning up dry logs. His rapid movements made
the Pandava army feel as if Drona was everywhere at the same time
showering arrows like rain and converting the battlefield into a stage for the
dance of the God of Death.He cut the Pandava army in twain where Dhrishtadyumna stood. Many
were the single combats among renowned warriors. There was a fierce
battle between Sahadeva and Sakuni skilled in illusion-warfare. When their
chariots broke, they alighted on the ground and, like two bills sprung to life
and motion, they struck each other with maces and closed with one another
in single combat.
Between Bhima and Vivimsati there was a great battle in which chariots
were broken on both sides. Salya fought his nephew Nakula and harassed
him exceedingly , smiling most provokingly all the time. But, in the end,
Salya had his car smashed and his flag brought down, and he withdrew
admitting defeat. Between Kripacharya and Dhrishtaketu there was a battle
in which the latter was worsted. So also was there fierce fighting between
Satyaki and Kritavarma and between Virata and Karna. Abhimanyu’ s
valour was also demonstrated as he fought Paurava, Kritavarma, Jayadratha
and Salya single-handed and made them withdraw .
Then there was a great comba t between Salya and Bhimasena in which
Salya was defeated and made to retire. The Kaurava forces began to lose
courage and the Pandava army , who saw this, attacked the Kaurava army
with renewed ener gy and broke its ranks.
When Drona saw this, he decided to restore lost morale by leading a
straight attack on Yudhishthira. His golden chariot went forward, drawn by
four noble Sindhu horses, in the direction of Yudhishthira. Yudhishthira
answered with barbed arrows, feathered with eagle-feathers. But Drona did
not mind, and advanced at great speed. Yudhishthira’ s bow was cut down
and Drona was coming very near. Dhrishtadyumna tried to intercept Drona
but in vain. The whole army shouted: “Yudhishthira has been  taken!” So
near came Drona.
Suddenly , then, Arjuna appeared on the battlefield, the earth rumbling under
the wheels of his chariot, as it coursed swiftly over the bloody field, over
bones and bodies lying in heaps . Drona held back, for Arjuna had come on
the scene.
From Gandiva issued a continuous stream of arrows. No one could see the
shafts taken out of the quiver or placed in position. It seemed as if, from outof the great how, an unending flood of arrows issued without intermission.
The battlefield was darkened by flying missiles.
Drona retreated. Yudhishthira was not taken. The battle was stopped for the
day and the Kaurava forces went to their camp in chastened mood. The
Pandava army marched proudly  to camp and behind them walked Kesava*
and Arjuna conversing. Thus closed the eleventh day of the battle.
* KrishnaCHAPTER LXXVII: THE TWELFTH DAY
THE attempt to capture Yudhishthira alive failed. Drona was speaking to
Duryodhana about this.
“It is clear we cannot succeed in our efforts to seize Yudhishthira so long as
Dhananjaya is nearby . It is no want of interest on my part. If by some
stratagem we could draw Arjuna away to some other part of the field, I
could pierce the Pandava format ions and capture Yudhishthira. I promise to
seize him and deliver him to you provided he does not flee from  the battle,
renouncing honour . If he does that, then also we win indeed, do we not?”
The chief of the Trigartadesa who heard Drona say this talked it over with
his brothers, and they made a plan. They resolved to take the samsaptaka
oath and challenge Arjuna to battle and draw him away from Yudhishthira’ s
side.
Accordingly , together with a large force, they gathered, and sat before the
fire, dressed in matted grass, and went through funeral gifts and ceremonies
for themselves as if already dead, and took their oath: “Not till we have
killed Dhananjay a will we turn back. If we flee in fear from battle, may we
be punished as for deadly sin!”
Having adjured themselves thus before the sacred fire, they marched south
for that was the direction of Death, and shouted “O Arjuna!” challenging
him to battle. It was a great suicide squad organized to achieve what Drona
had pointed out to be essential.
Arjuna turned to Yudhishthir a and addressed him thus: “King, the
samsaptakas are calling me to battle. I am pledged to accept a challenge
thus thrown out. Susarma and his men are calling me to battle. I shall
destroy them all and return. Permit me to go. ”
“Brother beloved,” said Yudhishthira, “you know Drona’ s intentions. Keep
that in mind and do whatever you think fit. He has promised Duryodhana to
take me alive. He is a matchless warrior , brave, strong and skilled in every
branch of archery . He knows no fatigue and nothing escapes his watchful
eyes.”“King, here is Satyajit, standin g in support of you,” replied Arjuna. “As
long as he is alive and by you, nothing can happen to you.”  So saying
Arjuna asked the Panchala prince Satyajit to stand guard by Yudhishthira’ s
side and marched of f like a hungry lion to meet the samsaptakas.
“There, Krishna , see the Trigartas standing, cheerful under the intoxication
of their oath, though they know they go to certain death. Indeed they are
full of the exultation of appro aching swarga.” So speaking to his great
charioteer , Arjuna approached the lar ge samsaptaka force.
This was the twelfth day of the great battle. It was a fierce fight. After a
time, Arjuna’ s attack began to tell and the Trigartas fell in swathes before
him but Susarma reminded them of their oath.
“Heroes, we have taken our oaths before the fire and in the presence of the
whole army of warriors. Having  sworn terrible resolves, it is unworthy to
flinch. Let us not fall into public ridicule.” The samsaptakas cheered their
leader , and faced Arjuna with the sublime courage of accepted deaths.
“Hrishikesa, they are resolved  on fighting to the last. Drive on,” said
Arjuna.
Driven by Madhusudana* Arjuna’ s chariot moved like Indra’ s car in the
great war of the gods against the asuras. It went here and it went there and
wherever it went, Arjuna’ s great bow, the Gandiva, scattered death among
the doomed Trigartas. The burst of blood in their serried ranks was like the
burst of Palasa  blossoms in a spring-time forest. The fighting was severe.
At one time Arjuna’ s car and flag-pole were immersed in darkness under
the downpour of arrows.
“Are you alive, Dhananjaya?” shouted Krishna.
“Yes,” replied Arjuna, and pulling the string of his Gandiva, dischar ged
shafts that dispelled the arrow-shower .
It was like the Rudra dance of dissolution. The field was full of severed
limbs and headless bodies and presented a terrible spectacle.
As Arjuna proceeded to oppose  the samsaptakas, Drona gave orders for a
violent assault on the Pandava forces at the point where Yudhish thira stood.Yudhishthira saw this movement and spoke to the Panchala prince
Dhrishtadyumna:
“The brahmana  is coming to seize me. Look after the forces with
vigilance.”
The son of Drupada did not wait for Drona to advance, but marched
forward in his car himself to meet Drona.
Dronacharya avoided Dhrishtadyumna, for well he knew that his death was
destined to be at his hands and that death was not yet due; and he wheeled
his chariot in another direction where Drupada was leading his forces.
Drupada’ s force s suffered heavy punishment at Drona’ s hands and blood
flowed in streams on the battlefield. Drona, then, again turned his attention
to Yudhishthira. The Pandavas stood firm and answered Drona’ s attacks
with showers of arrows. Satyajit made a charge on Drona’ s car and there
was a fierce combat in which Drona’ s figure assumed the grimness of the
Destroyer . Many  a warrior was slain by him in succession. Vrika, a prince
of Panchala, as well as Satyajit, fell dead.
Seeing this, Satanika, son of Virata, marched against Drona. In a moment,
Satanika’ s severed head rolled on the ground with the golden kundalas
shining in the earlobes. Ketama , another chief, followed the attack but he
too perished. Then, Vasudhana  rushed forward to stop the advance of
Drona, but he too fell dead.
Yudhamanyu, Satyaki. Sikhandin and Uttamaujas who came to push Drona
back, were repulsed and all these great warriors had to retreat.  Drona was
now almost within reach of Y udhishthira
At that moment, Panchalya, another son of Drupada, rushed madly up to
stop the acharya and fought most desperately . But, he too was mortally
wounded and fell from his chariot like a falling star .
Then, Duryodhana was delighted and said exultingly to Karna:
“Radheya, do you see the valour of our mighty leader? No more will the
Pandavas be inclined towards  battle. See how their army reels under
Drona’ s blows.”Karna shook his head. “Do not be so confident," he said. “The Pandavas are
not to be so easily vanquished. They will never surrender . The wrongs they
have under gone  are too great to be forgotten. You tried to poison and kill
them. You tried to burn them alive. You have grieved and humiliated them
at the game of dice and you have forced them out to live in the forest for
long years. They will not surrender . See there, their army has rallied and all
their forces are leading a comb ined attack on Drona. There, see Bhima,
Satyaki, Yudhamanyu, Kshatradharma, Nakula, Uttamaujas, Drupada,
Virata, Sikhandin, Dhrishtaketu and other warriors have all come to protect
Yudhishthira and are pressing Drona hard. We should not stand idly
watching, when we have put such a heavy burden on the acharya. Great as
he is, there is a limit to the load even he can carry . Even wolves combined
in large numbers can harass and kill a mighty elephant. Let us proceed. It
will not do any longer to leave Drona unsupported.”
* KrishnaCHAPTER LXXVIII: BRAVE BHAGADATTA
DRONA made many attempts to take Y udhishthira prisoner , but failed.
Duryodhana led a large elephant division against Bhima. Bhima defended
himself from his chariot, with well-aimed arrows. He sent crescent-headed
shafts and tore down Duryodhana’ s flag and cut down his bow even as he
held it in his hand. Seeing the king harassed in this manner , the Mlechchha
king Anga marched against Bhimasena seated on a huge elephant. But
Bhima sent shafts that laid the elephant low and killed the Mlechchha king,
which resulted in scattering that section of the Kaurava forces  in fear and
confusion.
When the elepha nts stampeded, the horses also took fright and thousands of
footmen were trampled under the feet of the elephants and the horses, flying
in wild panic.
Seeing this great confusion and the scattering of the Kaurava forces in all
directions, the king of Pragjyoti sha, the brave Bhagadatta, grew indignant.
He got up on his renowned elephant Supratika and charged against
Bhimasena. The gigantic beast rushed forward with widespread ears and
twirling trunk, crashed into Bhimasena’ s chariot, and in an instant, horses
and vehicle were an unrecognizable mass, but Bhima escaped by jumping
off the car in the nick of time. He knew all about elephants. He got below
the great and fierce elephant and showered blows on vital points until the
great beast got mad and whirled round like a potter ’s wheel, trying to throw
off Bhimasena, who was sticking to its legs and harrying it from below . It
bent down and caught Bhima by its trunk and was about to crush him under
its knee s., when Vrikodara somehow released himself from its hold and
again got below , in between its limbs and sticking to the elephant’ s under -
regions, caused exceeding pain to the beast.
Bhima was thus gaining time in the hope that some elephant on the Pandava
side would be led to attack Bhagadatta’ s elephant and enable  him to get
away . But, when Bhima disapp eared from view , being hidden in between
the beast‘s legs, the soldiers thought Bhima was slain. They exclaimed“Bhima is dead! Bhagadatta’ s elephant has crushed Bhimasen al” and the
cry was repeated all over Kurukshetra.
Yudhishthira heard the cry and, thinking Bhima was slain, urged the forces
to destroy Bhagadatta. The king of Dasarna charged against Bhagadatta.
Dasarna’ s elephant was also a fierce beast and there was great battle
between Supratika and Dasarna’ s elephant. But Supratika’ s tusk pierced
Dasarna’ s beast  in the side and it crashed down dead. At that moment,
Bhima emer ged from below Supratika and ran out safe, and the Pandava
army cheered when they saw Bhima alive.
Bhagadatta was now attacked on all sides, but he did not lose heart.
Resplendent on his elephant, he shone like a forest fire on a hill, as,
ignoring the enemies around him, he drove his beast on Satyaki‘s chariot.
The elephant seized the chariot with its great trunk and lifting it high dashed
it upside  down. Satyaki jumped  out of the chariot in time to save himself.
His charioteer displayed great agility and skill and saved the vehicle as well
as the horses, and righting the chariot, drove it to where Satyaki stood.
Bhagadatta’ s elephant wrought great havoc in the Pandava army , hurling
warriors about and killing them in great number , striking terror wherever it
went. Bhagadatta stood on its back, like Indra on Airavata when he fought
the asura s. With ears spread out rigid in anger and trunk extended in front,
the great beast trampled upon numerous horses, chariots and soldiers and
wrought destruc tion all over the Pandava army . The shafts hurled at it
seemed only to incense it more. Like a herdsman in the forest driving the
cattle where he would, Bhagadatta drove the soldiers of the Pandava army
before him. Bhimasena, equip ping himself once again with a chariot,
renewed his attack on Bhagadat ta. The elephant stretched out its trunk and
blew out a violent spray of mucus which scared the horses of Bhima’ s
chariot and they bolted in wild flight and the charioteer could  not check
them.
A great cloud of dust rose from  the field where this great elephant battle
raged. Arjuna saw this from where he was fighting the samsaptakas and he
also heard the tumult created by Bhagadatta’ s elephant He feared  things had
gone wrong and said to Krishna: “Madhusudana, this is the cry of
Supratika, Bhagadatta’ s elephant. This king of Pragjyotisha is terrible withhis elephant, and has no equal in that kind of warfare. He is sure to defeat
and confound our men. We must proceed at once and save the situation. We
have punished these samsapt akas enough. Drive to where Drona is
engaging Y udhishthira.”
Krishna drove the chariot accordingly towards the main battle-front.
Susarma and his brothers came  up behind the chariot and shouted “Stop,
stop.” At the same time, they dischar ged shafts at Arjuna’ s chariot.
Arjuna was in two minds.
“Here is Susarm a challenging me to battle and I hated declining this kind of
invitation, but there, to the north of us, our formation seems broken and our
men are in need of immediate relief.”
While Arjuna was pondering thus, a javelin came hurtling at Arjuna and
another towards  Janardana. Wild with anger , Arjuna sent three well-aimed
shafts, which compelled Susanna to turn back.
They lost no more time but drove quickly to where Bhagadatta was doing
havoc. As soon  as Arjuna’ s car was seen, the Pandava forces  rallied and
soon Arjuna reached the lines where Bhagadatta was. Bhagadatta attacked
Arjuna on Supratika like the Destroyer incarnate. But Vasudeva’ s skill
avoided the shock, each time the beast char ged.
Bhagadatta showered arrows on Arjuna and Krishna. But Arjuna’ s arrows
broke the elephant’ s armour and began to hurt the beast. Bhagadatta saw
that his elephant  could no longe r stand the attack and he hurled a javelin at
Krishna. Arjuna met it with a shaft from his bow and broke it into two.
Bhagadatta then dischar ged another javelin which struck Dhananjaya’ s
helmet.
Readjusting his helmet, Arjuna bent his bow exclaiming: “Bhagadatta, take
your last look at the world and prepare for death!”  Bhagadatta was a
veteran of very advanced age. His grey hair and the wrinkles on his noble
old face gave him the intrepid appearance of a lion; indeed, so old was he
that the skin hung loose down over his eyes and he had tied its folds over
his forehead with a silk kerchief so that they might not interfere with his
sight. Bhagadatta was not more renowned for valour than for purity ofcharacter and conduct and was one of the most illustrious among the brave
men of his time. Men gave him the title “Friend of Indra” in recognition of
his greatness.
“Look around for the last time,”  said Arjuna to this great man and hurled at
him shafts whic h broke his bow, shattered his quiver and pierce d the joints
of his armour .
In those  days, all warriors were heavy armour and the secret of hitting weak
points such as joints and moving parts was specially studied by kshatriyas
and was an important part of military training. When deprive d of all his
weapons, Bhugadatta hurled his elephant goad at Arjuna. It was sent with
deadly aim and charged with the Vaishnava mantra. It would have killed
Arjuna, but Krishna came in between and presented himself as a target for
the missile. It settled on his chest as a shining necklace. Char ged with the
mantra of Vishnu, it could not hurt Vishnu but just became the Lord’ s
jewelled garland round his neck.
“Janardana, how is it you have offered yourself as a target for the enemy’ s
missile? You said you would be charioteer and leave all the fighting to me.
How could you do this?” protested Arjuna.
“Beloved Arjun a, you do not understand. This shaft would have killed you
if it had hit you, but it is really my own thing and came back to its lawful
owner .” Krishn a said and laughed. Then, Partha sent an arrow which
entered the head of Bhagadatta’ s elephant as a serpent enters into the ant-
hill.
Bhagadatta tried to urge his great beast forward, but it stood stark rigid, and
his loud command went in vain even as the words of man, who has lost his
wealth, are disregarded by his wife.
Like a great hill the elephant stood rigid for a moment and then, it suddenly
sank down drivi ng its tusks into the earth and yielded up the ghost with an
agonised squeal.
Arjuna was somewhat grieved at the death of the noble animal and for his
not having been able to slay Bhagadatta without killing the beast. Arjuna’ s
shafts tore the silken napkin that bound up the folds of the aged king’ s
forehead and he was blinded at once by his own hanging wrinkles. Soon, asharp crescent-h eaded shaft came and pierced his chest and Bhagadatta fell
like a great tree in a storm, his golden necklace shining like flowers on the
uprooted tree. The Kaurava forces fell into utter confusion .
Sakuni’ s brothers, Vrisha and Achala, tried their best to oppose Arjuna and
attacked him in front and rear. But their chariots were soon dashed to pieces
and they were themselves stricken dead on the field like two lion cubs.
They both looked much alike and equally noble in appearance. The poet
says that the bodies of these two valiant heroes who did not flee when the
rest fled, shed a strange lustre all around. Sakuni was full of anger , when he
saw his brave and incomparable brothers lying dead on the field. He
attacked Arjuna  fiercely and used all the weapons of illusion, in which he
was skilled. But Arjuna’ s strok es broke all the charms and rendered them
useless, and Sakuni had to leave the field, as fast as his horses  could bear
him. The Pandava forces then attacked Drona’ s army and wrought great
havoc till the sun set, and the twelfth day’s fight ended. Drona gave orders
to cease fighting and the Kaurava forces, which had lost heavily , retired in
sullen dejection to their camp. The Pandava army , on the other hand, was in
high spirits and its warriors gathered round camp-fires in cheerful talk and
praise of Arjuna and the other heroes, who had led them to victory .CHAPTER LXXIX: ABHIMANYU
EARL Y next morning, Duryod hana went to Dronacharya in a state of
bitterness and anger and, after the customary salutation, address ed him thus
in the presence of a lar ge number of generals:
“Esteemed brahmana, Yudhishthira was quite within your reach yesterday
and, if you had really wished to take him no one could have prevented you.
Yet, you did not take him, and to me the events of yesterday are
inexplicable. I cannot understand what makes it hard for you to carry out
your promise to me. V erily great men are un-understandable.”
Dronacharya was exceedingly hurt by this insulting insinuation.
“Duryodhana,” he said, “I am putting forth on your behalf all the strength
and skill I possess. You entertai n thoughts unworthy of a king. As long as
Arjuna is presen t, supporting Yudhishthira, it is not possible for us to seize
him. I have told you that alread y. It is only if we manage somehow to get
Arjuna out of the battlefield that we can hope to carry out this plan as you
desire and I am devising ways to attain this objective.”
Thus did Drona nobly conqu er his just anger and seek to comfort
Duryodhana in his distress.
On the thirteent h day, the sams aptakas again challenged Arjuna to battle
and he accordingly went to attack them, where they were arrayed to the
south of the main battlefront. The battle that was fought between the
samsaptakas and Arjuna was the fiercest that ever had been seen or heard of
till that day .
When Dhananjaya left the main front for meeting the samsaptakas, Drona
rearranged his army in lotus formation and attacked Yudhishthira fiercely .
Bhima, Satyaki, Chekitana, Dhrishtadyumna, Kuntibhoja , Drupada,
Ghatotkacha, Yudhamanyu, Sikhandin, Uttamaujas, Virata, the Kekayas,
Srinjayas and many others opposed him, but their resistance seemed
paralysed by the violence of Drona’ s offensive.
Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna and Subhadra, was still adolescent, but had
already won recognition as a mighty man-at- arms even as the equal of hisfather and uncle in battle. Y udhishthira called Abhimanyu and said to him:
“Dear son, Dronacharya is harry ing our army greatly . Arjuna is absent and,
if we should be defeated in his absence, he will be grieved beyond measure.
No one among us has been able to break Drona’ s array . You know you can
do it and no one else. I ask you to take up this task.”
“I can do it,” replied Abhimanyu. “I have been instructed by my father how
to penetrate this formation and can certainly do so. But if, after forcing my
way, it should unfortunately become necessary for me to come  out, I shall
be at a loss what to do, being as yet uninstructed in the art of extrication.”
“Valiant boy, break this impreg nable formation and open a passage for us.
We shall all break in in your wake. We shall be with you to face any danger
and no question can arise of your having to come out.”
Bhimasena supported Yudhishthira’ s proposal: “I shall be immediately
behind you and enter when you succeed in breaking the enemy’ s formation.
So also will Dhrishtadyumna, Satvaki, the Panchalas, the Keka yas and the
forces of Matsy adesa. Only break the formation as you alone can do; we
shall do the rest and smash the Kaurava army .”
Abhimanyu thought of his father and Krishna and, feeling encouraged by
what had been said by Bhimasena and Yudhishthira, and impelled by his
own gallant nature, undertook the adventure .
“I shall please my great father and uncle.” he said with enthusias m. “Let my
valour be staked on this.”
“May your prowess grow ," said Y udhishthira and blessed the youth.
“Sumitra, see Drona’ s flag flying there! Drive straight and fast to that
point,” said Abhimanyu to his charioteer .
“Faster , faster!” ur ged Abhimanyu as they sped along.
“May the gods protect you!” said the charioteer . “Yudhishthira has placed a
very great burden on your youn g shoulders. Think well before you pierce
Drona’ s array and enter . The acharya is unrivalled in skill and experience,
while you, though his equal in valour , have not his long years to back it.”Abhimanyu smiled and replied: “Friend, I am Krishna's nephew and son of
Arjuna, am I not? Which other has that advantage? Fear dare not approach
me! These enemies here have not a sixteenth part of my strength . Drive fast
towards Drona’ s division. Do not hesitate.”
The charioteer obeyed.
As the golden chariot to which were yoked beautiful young horses
approached, the soldiers in the Kaurava army shouted: “Abhimanyu is
coming! He has come!” The Pandavas followed Abhimanyu close behind
him.
The Kaurava warriors were perturbed as they saw Abhimanyu’ s chariot
approach them with great speed.
“Here is one greater in valour than Arjuna,” they thought and began to lose
heart.
Like a young lion on a herd of elephants, Abhimanyu rushed on. There was
a ripple in the Kaurava ranks which bent under his headlong onslaught. The
bend soon becam e a break and under Drona’ s very eyes, the formation was
breached and Abhimanyu entered. But the breach closed under the
inspiration of Jayadratha, king of the Sindhus, before the other Pandava
warriors could force their way in according to plan-and Abhimanyu was
alone!
Kaurava warriors opposed him, but they fell like moths in the fire, one after
another . Abhima nyu’s shafts searched the weak points in the armour of his
enemies, and the bodies of soldiers lay strewn on the field like Kusa grass
on the sacrificia l platform. Bows, arrows, swords, shields, javelins, pieces
of harness, chariot canopies, axes, maces, spears, whips, conchs, along with
severed heads and limbs of slain warriors, covered the field.
Seeing the destruction wrought by Abhimanyu, Duryodhana was wrath and
rushed in person to oppose the youthful warrior . Drona, having  learnt that
the king himself was engaged in battle with Abhimanyu, became anxious
and sent veterans to protect Duryodhana. With great difficulty , they
managed to rescue the king from  the boy-hero who, greatly disappointed at
the escape of Duryodhana vented his anger on the warriors that had come to
rescue him and put them to headlong flight.Then, throwing away all sense of shame and chivalry , a large number of
veteran warriors made a combined and simultaneous attack on the hero,
who found himself alone, surrounded by enemies on all sides. But, even as
on all sides a rock receives the rising tide of the sea, Arjuna’ s son withstood
this united onslaught. Drona, Aswatthama, Kripa, Karna, Sakuni, Salya and
many other great warriors in their chariots, equipped with all arms, surged
in attack on the young hero, only to be dashed back, baffled and broken.
Asmaka rode his chariot at great speed against Abhimanyu’ s but smiling,
Abhimanyu sent his shafts and disposed of him in no time. Karna’s armour
was pierced. Salya was badly wounded and sat, unable to move, in his
chariot. Salya’ s brother came up in great wrath to avenge his brother ’s
disgrace but he fell and his chariot was broken to pieces.
Thus did Abhimanyu, alone and unsupported, oppose a host of veteran
warriors and show the skill in the use of arms which he had learnt from his
illustrious father and from Vasudeva, his uncle. Seeing this, the poet says,
Dronacharya’ s eyes were filled with tears of af fectionate admiration.
“Was there ever a fighter to equal this boy Abhimanyu?” exclaimed Drona
to Kripa, in the hearing of Duryodhana who could not contain his anger .
“The acharya’ s partiality for Arjuna prevents him from killing Abhimanyu,”
Duryodhana said, “and he sings his praises instead of fighting him. Indeed,
if the acharya were minded to dispose of Abhimanyu, would it take him
long to do it!”
Often did Duryodhana suspect and complain in this manner against
Bhishma and Drona. Having undertaken a war of adharma, he was often led
to speak  in this manner and hurt the feelings of the acharyas who stood
loyally by him, even when they saw the wickedness of his ways.
Duhsasana roared in anger and exclaiming “this obstinate lad will perish
now!” led his chariot forward to attack Abhimanyu.
The chariots of Abhimauyu and Duhsasana made wonderful movement
against each other and the battle raged long. Duhsasana was struck
senseless in his car, and his charioteer just managed to drive away from the
field saving Duhsasana’ s life.Karna attacked Abhimanyu with his shafts and harassed him greatly . But
one of Abhima nyu’s arrows felled Karna’ s bow and the young warrior
followed up this advantage so vigorously that he put Karna and his
supporters to flight. The Kaurava forces, when they saw this were
completely demoralised .
The army was in confusion and men fled in all directions, not caring for
Drona’ s shouts of remonstrance, and Abhimanyu destroyed those that stood,
as fire destroys a dry jungle in summer .CHAPTER LXXX: THE DEATH OF
ABHIMANYU
THE Pandavas, proceeding according to plan, had closely followed
Abhimanyu when he broke into the Kaurava formation, but Dhritarashtra’ s
son-in-law Jayad ratha, the gallant king of the Sindhus, swooped down upon
the Pandavas with all his forces , and enabled the breach in the formation to
be effectively and solidly closed up, so that the Pandavas found it
impossible to force their way in. Yudhishthira hurled a javelin and cut
Jayadratha’ s bow but, in an instant, the Saindhava took up another bow and
sent unerring shafts at Dharmaputra. Bhimasena’ s arrows made deadly
work, crashing down the canopy and flagstaf f of Jayadratha’ s car. But the
Saindhava was alert and re-armed himself, each time his equipment was
broken. He killed Bhima’ s chariot horses, and the latter had to go into
Satyaki’ s car.
In this manner , Jayadratha, with stubborn valour , prevented the Pandavas
from entering in Ahhimanyu’ s wake. The young hero was thus isolated and
surrounded by the Kaurava forces.
The son of Subhadra was however undaunted. He attacked all the warriors
around him and slew them in great number . Like rivers losing themselves in
the ocean, the soldiers that went to attack him, disappeared  before his
arrows. The Kaurava army reeled under Abhimanyu’ s onslaughts.
Duryodhana’ s son Lakshmana, a gallant young warrior , then charged on
Abhimanyu. When they saw this, retreating soldiers came  back and
supported Lakshmana, showering arrows on Abhimanyu, like rain falling
on a hill. Still Arjuna’ s son was undaunted and, his shaft came swift and
shining, like a serpent fresh-sloughed, and pierced Lakshmana. The
handsome youth, with beautiful nose and eyebrows and hair, lay dead on
the held and the Kaurava soldiers were filled with grief.
“To hell with the wicked Abhi manyu,” shouted Duryodhana, and the six
great warriors,  Drona, Kripa, Karna, Aswathama, Brihatbala and
Kritavarma closed upon Abhimanyu.“It is impossible to pierce this youth’ s armour ,” said Drona to Karna. “Aim
at the reins of his horses and cut them off. Disable him thus and attack him
from behind.”
The son of Surya did accordingly . Abhimanyu’ s bow was broke n by a shaft
dischar ged from behind. His horses and charioteer were killed. Thus
disabled, the young warrior stood on the field, with sword and shield, facing
his enemies. As he stood dauntless like kshatriyadharma incarnate, he filled
the warriors around with amazement. Whirling his sword, he held his own
against the numerous warriors who had surrounded him, with a skill that
confounded them. It seemed to them as if his feet did not rest on earth and
he was on wings in the air .
Drona sent a shaft that broke Abhimanyu’ s sword. Karna’ s sharp arrows
tore his shield into bits.
Then Abhimanyu bent down and taking up one of his chariot wheels and
whirling it like a discus, stood up facing all the enemies that surrounded
him. The dust from the chariot wheel covered him and the poet says it
enhanced the natural beauty of the young hero.  He fought fiercely like a
second Vishnu with the discus. But soon, the combined onsla ught of the
warriors that surrounded him, overpowered him. The chariot wheel was
shattered to pieces. The son of Duhsasana came up then and closed with
him in mortal combat. Both fell down together but Duhsasana ’s son rose
again and, while Abhimanyu was struggling to his feet, struck him with his
mace and killed him .
“Subhadra’ s son who, like an elephant in a lily pond, single-han ded worked
havoc in the Kaurava army , was thus overpowered by number s and killed
cruelly ,” said Sanjaya to Dhritarashtra. “And, having killed him, your
people danced round his dead body like savage hunters exulting over their
prey. All good men in the army were grieved and tears rolled  from their
eyes. Even the birds of prey, that circled overhead making noises seemed to
cry ‘Not thus!’ ‘Not thus!’ ”
While there was blowing of conchs and cries of victory all over the Kaurava
army , Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarashtra, did not approve of all this. “This is
ignoble,” he angrily cried. “Sold iers, you have forgotten your code. Verily,you should be ashamed but, instead, you shout brazen cries of victory .
Having committed a most wicked deed, you revel in foolish joy, blind to the
danger that is imminent.”
So saying, Yuyutsu threw his weapon away in disgust and left the
battlefield. This young son of Dhritarashtra feared sin. His words were not
sweet in the Kaurava ears, but he was a good man and spoke out his mind.CHAPTER LXXXI: A FATHER’S GRIEF
YUDHISHTHIRA was plunged in sorrow . “He has gone to the sleep that
knows no waking, he who in battle overcame Drona, Aswatthama and
Duryodhana and who was like a destroying fire to enemy forces. O warrior
that made Duhsasana flee in fear, are you dead? What then is there for me
to fight for or win? Why do we want kingdom now? What words of comfort
can I offer to Arjuna? And what shall I say to Subhadra quivering like a
cow bereaved of her calf? How can I utter to them vain words of solace that
serve no purpose? Truly, ambition destroys the understanding of men. Like
the fool who, looking for honey , falls into a precipitous pit below and is
destroyed, in my desire for victory I pushed to the battle-front this boy,
whose life was all before him in love and joy. There is no fool like me in
the world. I have killed Arjuna ’s beloved son, instead of protecting him
during the absence of his father .”
Thus was Yudhishthira lament ing in his tent. Around him were sitting
warriors, silent in sorrowful thought of the valour of the youthful hero and
his cruel death.
It was always the custom with Vyasa to come and comfort the Pandavas,
whenever they were in great sorrow. He was their great teacher as well as
grandsire. So he appeared now before Yudhishthira. The sage was received
with all honour and Yudhishthira, having made him sit, said: “I have tried
very hard to find peace of mind, but I am unable to find it.”
“You are wise and a knower ,” said Vyasa, “and it is not meet that you
should allow yourself to be lost in grief in this manner . Knowin g the nature
of death, it is not right that you should grieve like the unlearned.” Vyasa
proceeded to console the bereaved Dharmaputra: “When Brahma created
living beings, he was filled with anxiety . ‘These lives will multiply and
soon their number will be beyo nd the capacity of the earth to bear. There
seems to be no way of coping with this.’ This thought of Brahm a grew into
a flame which became bigger and bigger until it threatened to destroy all
creation at once. Then Rudra came and pleaded for allaying this destructive
fire. Brahma controlled the great fire and subdued it into the law that is
known to mortals as Death. This law of the creator takes many forms, suchas war or sickness or accident and keeps the balance between birth and
death. Death is thus an inescapable law of existence, ordained for the good
of the world. It is not true wisdom to be impatient with Death or to grieve
immoderately for those who die. There is no reason to pity those who pass
away . We may have reason indeed to grieve for those who remain.”
After saying these words of solace, Krishna-Dwaipayana retired.
Dhananjaya and Krishna were proceeding towards their camp after
defeating and slaying the samsaptakas.
“Govinda, I do not know why,” said Arjuna, “but my mind is not at ease.
My mouth feels parched and my heart is troubled with a great presentiment
of loss. I wonde r if any calamity has happened to Yudhishthira . Something
makes me afraid, Krishna.”
“Do not be concerned about Yudhishthira,” replied Krishna. “He and your
other brothers are safe.”
On the way, they halted and did the evening prayers. Rem ounting the
chariot, they proceeded to the camp. As they approached the camp,
Arjuna’ s premonitions of calamity increased.
“Janardana, we do not hear the usual auspicious music in the camp. The
soldiers, seeing me from a distance, hang down their heads and avoid my
sight. This is strange behaviour on their part. O Madhava, I fear greatly . Do
you think my brothers are safe? I am confused. How is it Abhi manyu does
not run out to meet us today as usual, accompanied by his brothers?”
They entered the camp.
“Why are you all wearing sad faces? I do not see Abhimanyu here. How is
it I see no glad faces? I understood that Drona arrayed his army  in the lotus
formation. No one among you could pierce it as far as I know . Did
Abhimanyu force his way in? If so, he is dead, for I did not teach him how
to make his way out of that formation. Has he been slain indeed?”
When their mournful silence, and downcast eyes, that dared not meet his,
had confirmed his worst fears, the bereaved father burst into heart-broken
lamentation.“Alas, has my dear boy indeed become Yama’ s guest? Yudhishthira,
Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna and great Satyaki, have all of you allowed the
son of Subhadra  to be slain by the enemy? Alas! What comfort shall I give
to Subhadra? What shall I say to Draupadi? And what solace can be given
to Uttara and who shall give it?”
Vasudeva spoke to his stricken friend. “Beloved Arjuna," he said, “do not
give way thus to grief. Born as kshatriyas we have to live and die by
weapons. Death is ever the companion of those who have taken up the
profession of arms and go into battle, determined not to retreat. Warriors
must be ever ready to die youn g. Abhimanyu, boy as he was, has attained
the happy regions above whic h grey-haired veterans yearn to reach in
battle. Abhiman yu’s end is indeed the prescribed and much-desired goal of
all kshat riyas. If you give way to grief in this inordinate way, your brothers
and other kings will lose heart. Stop grieving and infuse courage and
fortitude into the hearts of the others.”
Dhananjaya desired to be told the full story of his brave son’s end and
Yudhjshthira related it: “I incited Abhimanyu to enter the enemy’ s
formation, for I knew that he alone could do it among all of us. ‘Make your
way into the lotus array and we shall follow immediately behind you. This
great deed of yours will please the hearts of your father and your uncle,’ I
said. The youthful hero did accordingly and broke the great formation and
made his way in. We went behin d him according to plan. But, just then, the
wicked Jayadratha came and ef fectively stopped us. He caused the breach in
the formation to be closed up at once and we found ourselves unable to
follow Abhimanyu. The Sindh u kept us out, and then,-Oh, shame on
kshatriyas who could do this!- a crowd of redoubtable warriors hemmed
him in, thus isolated, and slew him.”
When he heard the full story , Arjuna was again overwhelmed by grief and
he fell on the ground in a swoon.
When he recove red, he took an oath: “Before sunset tomorrow , I shall slay
this Jayadratha who caused my son’s death. If Drona and Kripa come
between him and me these acharyas also shall be overwhelmed and slain!”
Saying this, he twanged the Gandiva string, and Krishna  blew the
Panchajanya. And Bhima said: “This twang of Arjuna’ s bow and this blareof Krishna’ s conch shall be, unto the sons of Dhritarashtra, the summons of
Death!”CHAPTER LXXXII: THE SINDHU KING
NEWS of Arjuna’ s oath reached the enemy . The spies informed
Duryodhana’ s friends that Arjuna, having learnt that Jayadratha was the
cause of Abhimanyu’ s death, had vowed to kill the Sindhu king before
sunset next day .
Vriddhakshatra, the illustrious king of the Sindhus, was blessed with a son,
who was named Jayadratha. At the time of the birth of the prince, a voice
was heard to say: “This prince will attain great glory and he will attain the
happy regions above, slain in battle. One who, among the warriors of all
ages, ranks among the most illustrious will, in the field of battle, sever his
head from the body .”
All living beings must die, but hardly any, however wise or brave, welcome
it. Vriddhakshatr a was grieved to hear the voice declare his son’s end. In his
disturbed state of mind, he uttered a curse: “He who shall cause my son’s
head to roll down on the ground, shall have his head burst at that very
moment into fragments.”
Jayadratha grew  up and, when he reached manhood, Vriddhakshatra handed
over the care of the State to the prince and retired to the fores t, where he
spent the evening of his days in austerities in an ashrama near the plain,
which afterwards became the Kurukshetra field of battle. When Jayadratha
came to know about Arjuna’ s vow, he remembered the predictio n about his
death and feared his end was near .
“I do not want to be in this battle any longer . Let me go back to my
country ,” he said to Duryodhana.
“Do not fear, Saindhava," replied Duryodhana. “Here are all these veterans
and warriors who will stand between you and danger . Karna, Chitrasena,
Vivimsati, Bhurisravas, Salya, Vrishasena, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhoja,
Kamboja, Sudakshina, Satyavrata, V ikarna, Durmukha, Duhsasana, Subahu,
Kalinga, the Avanti princes, Drona, Drona’ s illustrious son and Sakuni all
these warriors and I myself are here and you cannot be in danger . The
whole of my army will have but one task today-to defend you againstArjuna. You should not leave us now.” Jayadratha agreed to remain. He
went to Drona and said to him:
“Master , you taught me and Arjuna and you know us both well. What is
your appraisal of us two?”
“Son, I dischar ged my duties as teacher and dealt with you both impartially .
The instruction was the same to you and to Arjuna, but Arjuna excels
because of his superior discipline and his own practice. But, you need not
be disco uraged.by this. You will be placed behind a strong force which
Arjuna cannot easily pierce. Fight according to the traditi on of your
ancestors. Death  comes to us all, cowards as well as brave men, and the
warrior dying in battle attains with ease the happy regions which others
only attain with great dif ficulty . Discard fear and fight.”
Drona, having spoken thus to Jayadratha, proceeded to marshal the forces
for the next day .
Twelve miles to the rear of the main army Jayadratha and his detachment
were placed in a strongly guarded position. Bhurisravas, Karna,
Aswatthama, Salya, Vrishasena and Kripa were there with all their forces.
Between them and the Pandava army , Dronacharya arraye d the main
Kaurava forces in circular form ation. This was backed and supported by a
lotus formation  which again was supported by a spike-headed force.
Beyond this, stood Jayadratha. Drona stood at the head of the circular army ,
resplendent in white armour and helmet, seated in his great chariot, drawn
by beautiful chestnut-coloured horses and his flag waved high, displaying
the sacrificial platform and deerskin which formed Drona’ s banner ,
inspiring the Kaurava army to utmost sacrifice and valour . Duryodhana saw
the army formation and his confidence was restored.
With a force consisting of one thousand armed chariots, a hundred
elephants, three thousand horsem en, ten thousand foot soldiers, and fifteen
hundred archers, Durmarshana, one of the sons of Dhritarashtra, moved
forward the main army and blew his conch and uttered his challenge:
“Where is Dhananjaya of whos e wrath and prowess men speak? Let him
come forward and striking against us, like a pot upon a rock, break to pieces
before the eyes of warriors.”Arjuna stopped his car at a bowshot and half and blew his conch in answer .
Then, conchs blew all over in the Kaurava army .
“Kesava, drive towards Durmarshana," said Arjuna. “We shall pierce the
line of elephants.”
Durmarshana’ s army was beate n. Like clouds driven about by a gale, the
Kaurava forces were scattered and fled in all directions. When Duhsasana
saw this, his anger rose. Leading a huge force of elephants he surrounded
Arjuna. Duhsas ana was a very wicked man but he was brave also. He
fought Arjuna fiercely and the field was strewn with the dead. Finally , he
withdrew defeated and went back to join Drona's forces.
Savyasachi’ s car swiftly proceeded forward and passed Drona.
“Illustrious one, grieving for my son, I have come to wreak vengeance on
the Sindhu king. I crave your blessings for the fulfilment of my vow," said
Arjuna to the acharya. The acharya smiled and said: “Arjuna, you must first
fight and defeat me before you can reach Jayadratha.” Saying this Drona
dischar ged a shower of arrows on Arjuna’ s car. Partha also replied with his
arrows but these the acharya parried with ease and sent flaming shafts that
hit Krishna and Arjuna. The Pandava then decided to cut Drona’ s bow and
bent his Gandiv a for that purpo se. Even as he was pulling his bow-string
Drona’ s shaft came and cut the string. The acharya, still retaining the smile
on his face, rained a shower of arrows on Arjuna and his horses and chariot.
Arjuna fought back, but the acharya showered his arrows which covered
Arjuna and his chariot in darkness.
Krishna saw things were not going at all well and said: “Partha, no more
waste of time. Let us proceed. It is no use fighting this brahmana, who
seems to know no fatigue.” Saying this, Krishna drove Arjuna ’s chariot to
the left of the acharya and proceeded forward.
“Stop, surely you will not proceed without defeating your enemy .”
“You are my guru, not my enemy , O acharya. I am in the position of a son
to you. There is no one in the wide world that can defeat you,” said Arjuna
and they proceeded forward at a swift pace by-passing Drona.Then Arjuna pierced the Bhoja army . Kritavarma and Sudakshina who
opposed his passage were defea ted. Srutayudha also tried to stop Arjuna’ s
progress. There was a fierce battle in which Srutayudha lost his horses and
he hurled his mace at Krishna . His mother had obtained this mace as a
result of her offering but the condition attached to the boon operated and it
came back and struck Srutayud ha himself dead. This is the story of the
mace.
Parnasa went through penances which pleased Varuna and obtained from
that god a boon that her son Srutayudha may not be killed by any enemy .
“I shall give your son a divine weapon. Let him use it in all his battles. No
enemy will be able to defeat him or kill him. But he should not use the
weapon against one who does not fight. If he does, the weapon  will recoil
and kill him. Saying this, god Varuna gave a mace. Srutayudha, when
fighting Arjuna, disregarding the injunction, hurled the mace  at Krishna
who was not fighting but was only driving Ariuna’ s chariot. The missile hit
Janardana’ s chest and immediately rebounded fiercely back to Srutayudha,
and like a demo n recoiling fatally on the magician, that commits an error in
uttering the spell of power that holds it in thrall, it slew Srutayudha and laid
him dead on the field, like a great forest tree blown down by a storm.
Then the king of Kamboja led his forces against Arjuna. After a fierce fight,
he lay stretched dead on the field like a great flagstaf f after the festival is
over.
When they saw the strong warriors, Srutayudha and the king of Kamboja,
slain, the Kaurava forces were in great confusion. Srutayu and his brother
Asrutayu then attacked Partha on both sides trying to save the situation, and
greatly harassed  him. At one stage of this battle, Arjuna leaned on the
flagstaf f, dazed with the wounds he received. But Krishna spoke to him
encouragingly and Arjuna recov ered and resumed the fight, slaying the two
brothers as well as their two sons who continued the struggle.
Arjuna marched on and, killing many more warriors, successfully made his
way to Jayadratha.CHAPTER LXXXIII: BORROWED ARMOUR
WHEN Dhritarashtra heard Sanjaya relate the success of Arjuna, he
exclaimed: “Oh Sanjaya! When  Janardana came to Hastinapura seeking a
settlement, I told Duryodhana that it was a great opportunity and he must
not lose it. I told him to make peace with his cousins. ‘Kesava has come to
do us a good turn. Do not disregard his advice,’ I said. But Duryodhana
heeded not. What Karna and Duhsasana said seemed to him better advice
than mine. The Destroyer entered his mind and he sought his own ruin.
Drona deprecate d war, so also did Bhishma, Bhurisravas, Kripa and others.
But my obstinat e son would not listen. Impelled by inordinate ambition, he
got entangled in anger and hatred, and invited this ruinous war .”
To Dhritarashtra  thus lamenting, Sanjaya said: “Of what avail are your
regrets now? The life-giving water has all run to waste and you now seek to
stop the breach. Why did you not prevent the son of Kunti from gambling?
Had you done the right thing then, all this great grief would  have been
stopped at the source. Even later, if you had been firm and stopp ed your son
from his evil ways, this calamity  could have been avoided. You saw the evil
and yet against your own sound  judgment, you followed the foolish advice
of Karna  and Sakuni. Kesava, Yudhishthira and Drona do not respect you
now as they did before. Vasudeva now knows that your rectitude is only
hypocrisy . The Kauravas are now doing their utmost as warriors, but they
are unequal to opposing the strength of Arjuna, Krishna, Satyaki and
Bhima. Duryodh ana has not spread himself. He is putting forth  his utmost
strength. It is not meet that you should now accuse him or his devoted
soldiers.”
“Dear Sanjaya, I admit my dereliction of duty. What you say is right. No
one can change the course of fate. Tell me what happened. Tell me all, be it
ever so unpleasant,” said the old king convulsed with grief. And obedient to
the old king’ s behest, Sanjaya continued his narration.
Duryodhana was greatly agitated when he saw Arjuna’ s chariot proceeding
triumphantly towards the Sindhu  king. He rushed to Drona and complained
bitterly:“Arjuna has effected a breach  in the great army and has advanced to
Jayadratha’ s position. Seeing our discomfiture, the warriors, protecting the
Sindhu king, will surely lose heart. They had believed that it was
impossible for Arjuna to get past you and that has now been falsified. He
advanced before  your eyes and nothing was done to prevent it. You seem
indeed bent on helping the Pandavas. I am in great distress of mind.
“Sir, tell me, in what matter have I offended you? Why are you letting me
down in this way? If I had known that you would do this, I should not have
asked Jayadratha to stay here. It was a great mistake I committed in not
letting him go, as he desired, back to his own country . If Arjuna attacks
him, it is not possible for him to escape death. Forgive me. I am talking
foolishly , distra cted by grief. Do go in person yourself to save the
Saindhava.” T o this frantic appeal Drona made answer:
“King, I shall not take offence at your thoughtless and unworthy remarks.
You are like a son to me-Aswatthama himself is not dearer! Do what I ask
you. Take this coat of armour and, donning it, go and stop Arjuna. I cannot
do so for my presence is necessary in this part of the field. See there, the
clouds of arrows! The Panda va army is attacking us in great force.
Yudhishthira is here unsuppor ted by Arjuna and is this not just the
opportunity we wanted? Our very plan has borne fruit and I must now take
Yudhishthira prisoner and deliver him to you. I cannot give up this objective
and run after Phalguna now. If I go after Arjuna now, our battle array will
be hopelessly broken and we shall be lost. Let me put this armour on you.
Go in confidence. Do not fear. You have valour , skill and expe rience. This
coat will protect you against all weapons. It will not let any blow pass
through your body . Go forth to battle, Duryodhana, in confidence as Indra
did, clad in the armour given by Brahma. May victory be yours.”
Duryodhana’ s confidence was restored and, as the acharya directed, he
went, accoutred in magic armour and accompanied by a large force of
soldiers, to attack Arjuna.
Arjuna had crossed the Kaurava army and gone far ahead towards where
Jayadratha had been kept for safety . Seeing that the horses were somewhat
fatigued, Krishna stopped the chariot and was about to unyo ke the tired
animals, when the brothers Vinda and Anuvinda came up suddenly andbegan to attack Arjuna. They were defeated and Arjuna scattered their
forces and slew them both. After this, Krishna unyoked the chariot and let
the horses roll in the mud. The horses rested for a while and were refreshed.
Then, they proceeded again according to plan.
“Dhananjaya, look behind! There comes the foolhardy Duryodhana. What
good luck! Long have you suppressed your anger , and now is the time for
you to let yourse lf go. Here is the man who caused all this grief , delivering
himself into your hands. But remember he is a great archer , well-versed in
bow- lore, and also a keen and strong-limbed fighter .” Thus said Krishna
and they halted to give battle to the Kaurava.
Duryodhana approached without fear .
“They say, Arjuna, that you have done acts of prowess. I have not seen this
myself. Let me see if your courage and your skill are indeed as great as
your reputation,” said Duryodhana to Arjuna as he began to battle .
The combat was fierce indeed and Krishna was surprised.
“Partha, I am astonished,” said Krishna, “how is it your arrows do not seem
to hurt Duryodhana’? This is the first time I see the shafts proceeding from
the Gandiva strike their targets without effect. This is strange.  Have your
arms lost their power? Or has Gandiva lost its quality? Why do your arrows
strike Duryodhana and drop to the ground without piercing him? This is
most puzzling.”
Arjuna smiled and replied: “I understand. This man has come accoutred by
Drona in charm ed armour . The acharya has taught me the secret of this
armour , but this man wears it as a bullock might do. You will see some fun
now!" Saying thus, Arjuna proceeded to shoot his arrows, first depriving
Duryodhana of his horses, his charioteer and his car. Then, Arjuna broke his
bow and disarmed him compl etely . Thereafter he sent needle-like darts
which pierced just those parts of Duryodhana’ s body that were not covered
by armour , until he could bear it no longer and turned and fled.
When Duryodha na was thus discomfited, Krishna blew his conch and it
sent a thrill of fear in Jayadratha’ s army . The warriors around the Sindhu
king were surprised. They at once got ready in their chariots andBhurisravas, Chala, Karna, Vrishasena, Kripa, Salya, Aswatthama and
Jayadratha-eight of them-arrayed their forces against Arjuna.CHAPTER LXXXIV: YUDHISHTHIRA’S
MISGIVINGS
WHEN the Pandavas saw Duryodhana proceeding in the direction of
Arjuna, they attacked the Kaura va army in force so as to hold Drona and
prevent him from going to Jayad ratha’ s rescue. So, Dhrishtadyumna led his
forces repeatedly against Drona. As a result of all this, the Kaurava army
had to fight on three fronts, and was greatly weakened.
Driving his chariot right against Drona’ s, Dhrishtadyumna attacked him
violently . Drona’ s chestnut horses and the Panchala’ s dove-coloured ones
were entangled with one anothe r and presented a picturesque sight like the
clouds at sunset. Dhrishtadyum na threw away his bow and, sword and
shield in hand, he sprang upon Drona’ s chariot. Now standing on the shafts
of the vehicle, now on the horse s and now on the yoke, he attacked Drona
bewilderingly , all the while seeming to scorch him with baleful and
bloodshot eyes. Long did this fight go on, Drona pulled his bow in great
wrath and sent a shaft, which would have drunk the Panchala’ s life but for
the unex pected intervention of Satyaki who sent an arrow and diverted the
acharya’ s shaft. Drona then turned and attacked Satyaki, which enabled the
Panchala warrio rs to take Dhrishtadyumna away . Drona, hissing like a
black cobra, his eyes red with anger , advanced on Satyaki who was among
the front rank warriors on the Pandava side and who, when he saw Drona
desiring battle, went forward to accept the challenge.
“Here is the man who, giving up his vocation as a brahmana has taken up
the profession of fighting and is causing distress to the Pandavas,” Satyaki
said to his charioteer . ‘This man is the principal cause of Duryodhana’ s
arrogance. This man fancies himself a very great soldier and is ever
bursting with conceit. I must teach him a lesson. Take the chariot up
quickly .”
Satyaki’ s chario teer accordingly lashed the silver -white horses and took the
car at a great pace. Satyaki and Drona shot shafts at one anoth er so quick
that they covered the sun, and the battlefield was in darkness for a while.The steel shafts swished glimmering like newly-sloughed snakes rushing
about.
The chariot hoods and the flagstaf fs on both sides were battered down.
Drona as well as Satyaki were bleeding profusely . The warriors on either
side stood still watching the duel and they did not blow their conchs or raise
their war cries or sound their lion-roars. The devas, vidyadharas,
gandharvas and yakshas watched the great battle from above.
Drona’ s bow was broken by a well-aimed shaft from Satyaki, and the son of
Bharadwaja had to take another bow and, even as he strung it, Satyaki shot
it down again. Drona took up another bow which too was shot down. And
so it went on till Drona lost a hundred and one bows without being able to
shoot an arrow . The great achar ya said to himself: “This man Satyaki is a
warrior in the class of Sri Rama, Kartavirya, Dhananjaya and Bhishma,”
and was glad he had an opponent worthy of him. It was a craftsman’ s
professional joy at skill display ed in the art he loved. For every specially-
charged shaft that Drona sent, Satyaki had a ready answer of equivalent
quality .
Long did this equal combat continue. Drona of unrivalled skill in archery
then resolved on killing Satyaki  and sent the fire astra. But Satyaki saw this
and, losing no time, sent the V aruna astra to counteract it.
But now Satyaki’ s strength began to fail and, seeing this, the Kaurava
warriors were glad and shouted in satisfaction. When Yudhishthira saw
Satyaki was hard pressed, he told those nearby to go to Satyaki’s relief.
“Our great and good hero Yuyud hana* is being overpowered by Drona. You
should go there at once,” he said to Dhrishtadyumna. “The brahmana will
otherwise slay Satyaki in a few minutes. Why are you hesitating? Go at
once. Drona is playing with Satyaki as a cat plays with a bird. Satyaki is
indeed in the paws of the Destroyer .” Yudhishthira ordered the army to
make a powerful attack on Drona.
Satyaki was saved with difficulty . Just then, the sound of Krishna’ s conch
was heard from the sector where Arjuna was fighting.
“O Satyaki, I hear Panchajanya,” cried Yudhishthira; “but the twang of
Arjuna’ s bow does not accompa ny it. I fear Arjuna has been surrounded byJayadratha’ s friends and is in danger . Arjuna is opposed by forces both in
front of him and in his rear. He pierced the Kaurava ranks in the morning
and he has not come back yet, though the greater part of the day is gone.
How is it that only Krishna’ s conch is heard? I fear Dhananjaya has been
slain and therefo re Krishna has taken up arms. Satyaki, there is nothing you
cannot accomplish. Your bosom  friend Arjuna, he who taugh t you, is in
mortal danger . Often has Arjuna spoken to me admiringly of your great skill
and prow ess. ‘There is not another soldier like Satyaki,’ he said to me when
we were  in the forest. Oh, look there! The dust is rising that side. I am
certain Arjuna has been surroun ded. Jayadratha is a powerful warrior , and
there are many enemy warriors  there helping him and resolve d to die in
defence of him. Go at once, Satyaki.” Thus did Dharmaputra speak in great
trepidation.
Satyaki, who was weary after his battle with Drona, replied: “Faultless
among men, I shall obey your command. What would I not do for
Dhananjaya’ s sake? My life is the merest trifle in my eyes. If you order me,
I am ready to fight the gods themselves. But allow me to put before you
what the wise V asudeva and Arjuna told me when they left. ‘Until we return
after slaying Jayadratha you should not leave Yudhishthira’ s side. Be
vigilant in protecting him. We entrust this to you in confidence and go.
There is only one warrior in the Kaurava army whom we fear, and he is
Drona. You know his sworn intention. We go leaving Dharmaputra’ s safety
in your hands.’ Thus said Vasudeva and Arjuna to me when they went.
Arjuna laid this trust on me, believing me fit for it. How can I disregard his
command? Do not have any fear about Arjuna’ s safety , No one can defeat
him. The Sindhu king and the others cannot cope with a sixte enth part of
Arjuna. Dharmaputra, to whom shall I entrust your safety if I must go? I see
no one here who can stand against Drona if he comes to seize you. Do not
ask me to go. Consider well before you command me to leave.”
“Satyaki,” replied Yudhishthira, “I have thought over it all. I have weighed
the dang er again st the need and I have concluded that you must go. You
leave me with my full permission. Here is the powerful Bhim a to look to
my safety . There is Dhrishtad yumna also, and there are many others
besides. There is no need to worry about me.”So saying, Yudhishthira placed  boxful of arrows and other weapons in
Satyaki’ s chariot and got fresh horses yoked thereto and sent Satyaki
uttering benedictions on him.
“Bhimasena, Yudhishthira is your charge. Be vigilant,” said Satyaki, and
went to join Dhananjaya.
Satyaki met with violent resistance as he proceeded to dash through the
Kaurava forces, but he cut his way through bearing down all opposition.
But the resistan ce was very stiff and his progress was slow. When Drona
saw Satyaki part from Yudhishthira, he began to assault the Pandava
formation witho ut rest or interval, until it began to break and retreat.
Yudhishthira was greatly agitated.
* Another name for Satyaki.CHAPTER LXXXV: YUDHISHTHIRA’S FOND
HOPE
“ARJUNA has not returned, nor has Satyaki, who was sent after him.
Bhima, my fear grows. I hear the Panchajanya, but not the twang of
Arjuna’ s bow-string. Satyaki, that bravest and most loyal of friends, has not
come back with any tidings. My anxiety is increasing every moment,” said
Yudhishthira to Bhima in great perplexity of mind.
“I have never seen you so agitated,” replied Bhimasena. “Do not let your
fortitude grow less. Command me as you please. Do not let the wheels of
your mind stick in the mud of anxiety .”
“Dearest Bhima , I fear your brother has been slain, and it seems to me
Madhava has now himself taken up arms. I hear the conch of Madhava but I
hear not the resounding twang of Gandiva. I fear Dhananjaya, the unrivalled
hero, in whom were centred all our hopes, has been killed. My mind is
confused. If you would do as I tell you, go at once to where Arjuna is. Join
him and Satyak i, and do what needs to be done, and come back. Satyaki,
under orders from me, pierced  the Kaurava ranks and proceeded in the
direction of Arjuna. You go now and do likewise and, if you indeed see
them alive, I shall know it by your lion-roar .”
“My Lord, do not grieve. I shall go and let you know they are safe,” said
Bhima, and immediately turning to Dhrishtadyumna said: “Panchala, you
know very well that Drona is seeking, by some means or other , to seize
Dharmaputra alive. Our foremost duty is to protect the King. But I must
also obey him and fulfil his command. And so I go, trusting him to your
care.”
“Bhima, do not be concerned. Go with an assured mind. Drona cannot take
Yudhishthira without first killing me,” said the heroic son of Drupada,
sworn enemy of Drona. And Bhima hurried away .
The Kauravas surrounded Bhima in full force and sought to prevent him
from going to Arjuna’ s relief. But like a lion scattering less noble beasts he
put his enemies to flight, killing no less than eleven of the sons of
Dhritarashtra. Bhima then approached Drona himself. “Stop,” cried Drona.“Here I am, your enemy . You cannot proceed further without defeating me.
Your brother Arjuna went in with my consent. But I cannot let you go.”
Drona spoke thus believing that he would receive the same courtesy from
Bhima as he did from Arjuna. But Bhima was furious at hearing these
words of Drona, and answered scornfully .
“Oh brahmana, it was not with your permission that Arjuna went. He broke
your resistance and pierced your battle lines fighting his way through, but
he did not hurt you out of pity. But I shall not, like Arjuna, show mercy to
you. I am your enemy . Once upon a time, you were our preceptor and were
like a father to us. We respected you as such. Now , you have yourself said
you are our enemy. May it be so!” Saying this, Bhima aimed his mace at
Drona’ s chariot which crumbled to pieces, and Drona had to take to another
chariot. The second chariot too was broken to pieces. And Bhima forced his
way through overcoming all opposition. Drona lost eight chariots that day,
and the army of the Bhojas that tried to stop Bhima was completely
destroyed. He proceeded mowi ng down all opposition and reached where
Arjuna was fighting Jayadratha’ s forces.
As soon as he espied Arjuna, Bhima roared like a lion. Hearing that roar,
Krishna and Arjuna were exceedingly pleased and raised yells of joy.
Yudhishthira heard these roars and, relieved of his doubts and anxieties, he
pronounced blessings on Arjuna. And he thought within himself: “Before
the sun sets today , Arjuna’ s oath will be fulfilled. He will slay the man who
caused Abhimanyu’ s death and will return in triumph. Duryodhana may sue
for peace after Jayadratha’ s death. Seeing so many of his brothers slain, it is
possible that foolish Duryodha na may see light. The lives of numerous
kings and great warriors have been sacrificed on the field of battle and even
the stubborn and narrow-vision ed Duryodhana may now see his fault and
ask for peace. Will this indeed happen? The great grandsire Bhishma has
been offered as a sacrifice. Will this wicked enmity end with it and shall we
be saved from further cruel destruction?”
While thus Yudhishthira was fondly hoping and dreaming of peace, the
battle was raging with great fury where Bhima, Satyaki and Arjuna were
engaging the enemy . Only the Lord knows through what travail the world
must evolve. His ways are inscrutable.CHAPTER LXXXVI: KARNA AND BHIMA
ARJUNA had left Yudhishthira  behind to repel Drona’ s attacks and had
gone to make good his word that before sunset Jayadratha would lie dead
on the field of battle. Jayadratha had been the main cause of Abhimanyu’ s
death. He it was who had effectively prevented the relief of Abhimanyu by
the Pand avas, and thereby caused Abhimanyu to be isolated, overpowered
and slain . We have seen how Yudhishthira in his anxiety sent first Satyaki
and then Bhima to join Arjun a in his battle against Jayadratha. Bhima
reached where Arjuna was engaged and sounded his simhanada.
Dharmaputra heard the lion-roar  of Bhima and knew that Arjuna was found
alive.
It was the fourteenth day and the battle raged fiercely at many points,
between Satyaki  and Bhurisravas at one place, between Bhima and Karna at
another and between Arjuna and Jayadratha at a third. Drona remained at
the main front resisting the attack of the Panchalas and the Pandavas, and
leading a counter -offensive against them.
Duryodhana arrived with his forces at the sector where Arjuna attacked
Jayadratha, but was soon defeated and turned back.
The battle thus raged long and furiously on more than one front. The armies
were so deployed that each side was exposed to danger in its rear .
Duryodhana was speaking to Drona:
“Arjuna, Bhima and Satyaki have treated us with contempt and proceeded
successfully to Jayadratha’ s sector and they are pressing hard on the Sindhu
king. It is indeed strange that, under your command, our battle-a rray should
have been broke n and our plans  completely foiled. Everyone asks how it is
that the great Drona with all his mastery of the science of war, has been so
badly outmanoe uvred. What answer shall I make? I have been betrayed by
you.”
Duryodhana thus, once again, bitterly reproached Drona, who replied
unperturbed:“Duryodhana, your accusations are as unworthy as they are contrary to
truth. There is nothing to be gained by talking about what is past and
beyond repair . Think of what is to be done now .”
“Sir, it is for you to advise me. Tell me what should be done. Give your best
consideration to the difficulties of the situation and decide and let us do it
quickly .” Puzzled and perplexed, thus did Duryodhana plead.
Drona replied: “My son, the situation is no doubt serious. Three great
generals have advanced, outman oeuvring us. But they have as much reason
to be anxious as we, for their rear is now left as open to attack as ours. We
are on both sides of them and their position is not therefore safe. Be
heartened, go up to Jayadratha again, and do all you can to support him. It
is of no avail to dishearten oneself by dwelling on past defeats and
difficulties. It is best I stay here and send you reinforcements as and when
required. I must keep the Panchalas and Pandava army engaged here.
Otherwise, we shall be wholly destroyed.”
Accordingly , Duryodhana went with fresh reinforcements again to where
Arjuna was directing his attack on Jayadratha.
The narrative of the fourteenth  day’s fighting at Kurukshetra shows that,
even in the Mahabharata times, the modern tactics of turning and
enveloping movements was not unknown. The advantages and risks of such
strategy appear to have been fully understood and discussed even in those
days. Arjuna’ s flanking manoeuvres perplexed his enemies greatly . The
story of that day’s battle between Bhima and Karna reads very much like a
chapter from the narrative of a modern war .
Bhima did not desire to fight Karna or remain long engaged with him. He
was eager to reach where Arjuna was. But Radheya would, by no means,
permit him to do this. He show ered his arrows on Bhimasena and stopped
him from proceeding.
The contrast between the two warriors was striking- Karna’ s handsome
lotus-like face was radiant with smiles when he attacked Bhima saying: “Do
not show your back,” “Now , do not flee like a coward,” and so on. Bhima
was all anger when taunted in this manner . He was maddened by Karna’ s
smiles. The battle was fierce but Karna did everything with a smiling air ofease whereas Bhima’ s face glowed with rage and his movements were
violent. Karna would keep at a distance and send his well-aimed shafts but
Bhima would disregard the arrows and javelins falling thick upon him and
always try to close with Karna. Radheya did, everything he did, calmly and
with graceful ease, whereas Bhimasena fumed and fretted with impatience,
as he showed his amazing strength of limb.
Bhima was red with bleeding wounds all over and presented the appearance
of an asoka tree in full blossom , but he minded them not, as he attacked
Karna cutting bows in twain and smashing his chariot. When Karna had to
run for a fresh chariot, there was no smile on his face, for anger rose in him,
like the sea on a full moon day, as he attacked Bhima. Both showed the
strength of tigers and the speed of eagles and their anger was now like that
of serpents in a fury. Bhima brought before his mind all the insults and
injuries which he and his broth ers and Draupadi had suffered, and fought
desperately , caring not for life. The two cars dashed against each other and
the milk-white horses of Karn a’s chariot and Bhimasena’ s black horses
jostled in the combat like clouds in a thunderstorm .
Karna’ s bow was shattered and his charioteer reeled and fell. Karna then
hurled a javelin  at Bhima, but Bhima parried it and continued pouring his
arrows on Karna, who had taken up a fresh bow .
Again and again did Karna lose his chariot, Duryodhana saw Karna’s plight
and calling his brother Durjaya said: “This wicked Pandava will kill Karna.
Go at once and attack Bhima and save Karna’ s life.”
Durjaya went as ordered and attacked Bhima who in a rage sent seven
shafts which sent Durjaya’ s horses and his charioteer to the abode of Yama
and Durjaya himself fell mortally wounded. Seeing his bleeding body
wriggling on the ground like a wounded snake, Karna was overwhelmed
with grief and circled round the hero, paying mournful honour to the dead.
Bhima did not stop but continued the fight and greatly harassed Karna.
Karna once again had to find a fresh chariot. He sent well-aime d shafts and
hit Bhima who in a fury hurled his mace at Karna and it crashed on Karna’ s
chariot and killed his charioteer and horses and broke the flagstaf f. Karna
now stood on the ground with bent bow .Duryodhana now sent another brother to relieve Karna. Durmukha went
accordingly and took Karna on his chariot.
Seeing yet anoth er son of Dhrit arashtra come to offer himself up to death,
Bhima licked his lips in gusto and sent nine shafts on the newly arrived
enemy , and, even as Karna climbed up to take his seat in the chariot,
Durmukha’ s amour was broken and he fell lifeless. When Karna saw the
warrior bathed in blood and lying dead by his side, he was again
overwhelmed with grief and stood motionless for a while.
Bhima relentlessly continued his attack on Karna. His sharp arrows pierced
Karna’ s coat of armour and he was in pain. But he too at once returned the
attack and wounded Bhima all over. Still the Pandava would not stop and
attacked Karna furiously . The sight of so many of Duryodhan a’s brothers
dying for his sake one after another was too much for Karna. This, and the
physical pain of his own wounds made him lose courage and he turned
away defeated, but, when Bhima stood up on the field of battle red with
wounds all over like a flaming fire and emitted a triumphant yell, he could
not brook it but returned to the combat.CHAPTER LXXXVII: PLEDGE RESPECTED
DHRIT ARASHTRA, hearing of the slaughter of his sons and the check
received by Karna, was desolate. “O Sanjaya, like moths falling in the fire,
my sons are being destroyed. The stubborn Duryodhana has led the lads
Durmukha and Durjaya, to their doom. Alas, I have lost these boys! The
fool said: ‘Karna, unrivalled among men for courage  and the
accomplishment of war, is on our side. Who then can defeat us? Even the
gods cannot win a battle against me when Karna is on my side. What can
these Pandavas do to me? But now he has seen Karna beating a retreat
when Bhimasen a, attacked him. Has he seen wisdom at least now? Alas,
Sanjaya, my son has earned the undying hatred of the son of Vayu, Bhima,
who has the strength of the god of death! W e are indeed ruined!”
Sanjaya replied: “O king, was it not you who brought about this
unquenchable hatred, listening to the words of your foolish and stubborn
son? To you indeed must be traced this greater disaster . You are now but
reaping the fruit of your discarding the advice of Bhishma and the other
elders. Blame yourself, king. Do not blame Karna and the brave warriors
who have done their best in battle.”
After thus admonishing the blind king, Sanjaya proceeded to tell him what
happened.
Five sons of Dhritarashtra, Durmarsha, Dussaha, Durmata, Durdhara and
Jaya, when they saw Karna put to flight by Bhima, at once rushed on the
latter . When Karna saw this, he was heartened and turned back to resume
his attack. Bhimasena at first ignored the sons of Dhrita rashtra and
concentrated on Karna. But they became so violent in their assault that
Bhima got incensed and, turning his attentions on them, disposed of all five
of them. They lay dead on the field, with their horses and their charioteers.
The young warriors with their bleeding wounds presented the appearance of
a forest with trees uprooted by a strong wind and lying flat on the ground
with their beautiful red blossoms.
When Karna saw another batch of princes slaughtered for his sake he
fought more grimly than ever before, Bhima too was more violent thanbefore, thinking of all the evil that Karna had wrought against the Pandavas.
He used his bow so as to disarm Karna completely . His horses and
charioteer were also laid low. Karna now jumped down from his chariot and
hurled his mace  at Bhima. But Bhima warded it off with shafts from his
powerful bow and covered Karna with a shower of arrows and forced him
to turn back and walk on foot.
Duryodhana, who watched this combat, was greatly grieved and sent seven
of his brothers  Chitra, Upachilra, Chitraksha, Charuchitra, Sarasana,
Chitrayudha and Chitravarman , to relieve Radheya. They gave battle to
Bhima displaying great skill and energy, but fell dead one after another , for
Bhima’ s passion was roused and his attack was irresistible. When Karna
saw so many of the sons of Dhritarashtra sacrificing themselves for him, his
face was wet with tears and he mounted a fresh chariot and began to attack
Bhima with deadly effect. The two combatants clashed like clouds in a
thunderstorm Kesava, Satyaki and Arjuna were filled with admiration and
joy as they watched Bhim a fighting. Bhurisravas, Kripacharya,
Aswatthama, Salya, Jayadratha and many other warriors of the Kaurava
army also broke into exclamatio ns, astonished at the way in which Bhima
fought.
Duryodhana was stung to the quick and burned with anger . Karna’ s plight
caused him extre me anxiety . He feared Bhima would kill Radheya that day,
and sent seven more of his brothers directing them to surround Bhim a and
attack him simultaneously .
The seven brothers sent by Duryodhana attacked Bhima, but fell one after
another , struck down by his arrows. Vikarna, who was killed last, was
beloved of all. When Bhima saw him fall dead after a brave fight, he was
deeply moved and exclaimed: “Alas, O Vikarna, you were just and knew
what was dharma! You fought in loyal obedience to the call of duty. I had to
kill even you. Indeed this battle is a curse upon us where-in men like you
and the grandsire Bhishma have had to be slaughtered.”
Seeing Duryodhana’ s brothers, who came to help him, slain one after
another in this manner , Karna was overwhelmed by anguish. He leant back
on his seat in the chariot and closed his eyes unable to bear the sight. Then
recovering control over his emotions he hardened his heart and began againhis attack on Bhima. Bow after bow was broken up by Bhimas ena’s shaft,
but Karna kept the battle. Eighteen times he had to take up a fresh bow.
Karna had long ago discarded his smile and his face showed savage anger
even as Bhima’ s. They now glared fiercely at each other as they fought.
Yudhishthira now heard Bhima ’s roar rise above the tumult of battle, and
heartened by it, he fought Drona with increased vigour .
In the renewed and fierce battle between Bhima and Karna, Bhima lost his
horses and charioteer . Soon his chariot also was smashed to pieces. Then,
Bhima hurled his spear at Karna who was in his chariot and as Karna
parried it with his shaft, Bhima advanced with sword and shield. But Karna
broke the shield  at once with his shafts. Then, Bhima whirled his sword and
hurled it, and it cut Karna’ s bow into two and fell on the ground. But Karna
took up yet another bow and assailed Bhima with arrows more fiercely than
before. Bhima, in a fit of uncontrollable rage, sprang upon Karna. Radheya
took cover behind his flagstaf f and escaped destruction. Thereupon, Bhima
jumped out of Karna’ s car down into the field of battle where, deprived of
all arms, he used the elephants lying dead on the ground to protect himself
from Karna’ s arrows and continued the fight. He picked up anything he
could lay hands  upon, wheels of broken chariots, the limbs of horses and
elephants that were lying about, and hurling them at Karna , kept him
engaged withou t interval, but this could not long continue and Bhima was
soon at a great disadvantage. Karna said exultingly: “Foolish glutton, you
do not know the science of war; why do you engage yourself in battle here?
Go to the jungle  and fill yoursel f with fruits and roots and grow fat. You are
a savage, not fit for kshatriya battle. Get away!” Hurling insulting taunts at
him, he made the helpless Bhima burn with rage, but mindful of his word to
Kunti, forbore from killing him.
“There, Arjuna! See how poor Bhima is being harassed by Karna,” said
Krishna.
Dhananjaya’ s eyes burned red with wrath, when he saw the plight of his
valiant brother . He bent his Gandiva and dischar ged his arrows on Karna
who then gladly turned his attentions from Bhima to Arjuna. He had
pledged his word to Kunti not to kill more than one of the Pand avas and he
reserved that option for great Arjuna.CHAPTER LXXXVIII: BHURISRAVA’S END
“THERE comes the valorous Satyaki,” said Krishna, the charioteer , to
Dhananjaya. “Your disciple and friend is marching up, triumphantly
breaking through enemy ranks.”
“I do not like it, Madhava,” replied Arjuna. “It was not right for him to have
left Dharmaputra and come here to join me. Drona is there ever seeking an
opportunity to seize Dharmaputra. Satyaki should have stuck to his post
there to guard him. Instead, he has come here. Old Bhur isravas has
intercepted Satyaki. It was a great mistake for Yudhishthira to have sent
Satyaki away here.”
There was a family feud betw een Bhurisravas and Satyaki which made
them inveterate foes. It had come about this way. When Devaki,  who was to
be the blessed mother of Sri Krishna, was a maiden, many princes
competed for her hand and there was a great battle between Somadatta and
Sini over it. Sini won, and on behalf of Vasudeva he placed Devaki in his
chariot and took her away . Since that incident there was feud between the
two clans, the Sini family and that of Somadatta. Satyaki was Sini’ s
grandson. Bhurisravas was Somadatta’ s son. When they found themselves
on oppo site sides in the Kuruks hetra battle, it was natural that, as soon as
Bhurisravas saw Satyaki, the old warrior challenged Satyaki to battle.
“Oh Satyaki,” cried Bhurisravas, “I know you strut about thinking yourself
a man of great prowess. Here  now I have you in my power and will
presently finish you. Long have I sought for this meeting. Like Indrajit
destroyed Dasaratha’ s son Laks hmana, you will die today and go to the
abode of Y ama, gladdening the hearts of many a bereaved widow .”
Satyaki laughed, “Have done with your vaunting,” he interrupted. “Words
are not deeds, and do not frighte n fighting men. Demonstrate your valour in
action and do not indulge in dry thunder like autumn clouds.”
After this exchange of words, the battle began, and the combat was as
between two fierce lions.
Their horses were killed, their bows were broken, and both were rendered
chariotless. They were now standing on the ground fighting with swordsand shields, till their shields were hacked to bits and their swords broken.
Then they were locked in a deadly embrace without weapons. They rolled
together on the ground; they leaped up and they sprang on each other; they
fell down again and so the combat went on for a long while.
Partha’ s mind was at the time concentrated on Jayadratha’ s movements and
he did not watch this combat between Satyaki and the son of Somadatta.
But his chariote er Krishna was deeply concerned about Satyaki’ s fate, for
he knew about the family feud.
“Dhananjaya,” said Krishna, “Satyaki is exhausted. Bhurisravas is going to
kill him now .”
Still Arjuna was following only Jayadratha’ s movements.
“Satyaki who came after an exhausting battle with the Kaurava forces has
been forced to accept Bhurisravas’ challenge,” said Krishna again. “It is a
most unequal battle. Unless we help him, beloved Y uyudhana will be slain.”
Even as Krishna was saying this, Bhurisravas lifted Satyaki up and brought
him crashing to the ground and all the men around in the Kaurava army
exclaimed: “Y uyudhana is dead!"
Again Krishna importuned: “Satyaki is lying almost dead on the field, the
best among the Vrishni clan. One who came to help you, is being killed
before your eyes. Y ou are looking on, doing nothing.”
Bhurisravas caught hold of the prostrate Satyaki and dragged him on the
ground as a lion drags its elephant prey .
Arjuna was in a great conflict of mind. “Bhurisravas has not been called to
battle by me, nor has he challenged me to fight. How can I send my shaft at
Bhurisravas when he is engaged  with another? My mind recoils from such
an act, although it is true a friend who came to help me is being  slaughtered
before my eyes.”
Just as Arjuna finished saying this to Krishna, the sky was darkened by a
cloud of arrows sent by Jayadratha. Arjuna replied with a shower of arrows,
but he constantly turned with pain to where Satyaki was in the mortal grip
of Bhurisravas.Krishna again pressed Arjuna to consider Satyaki’ s condition.  “O Partha,
Satyaki has lost all his weapons and he is now in Bhurisravas’ power ,
helpless.”
When Arjuna turned, he saw Bhurisravas with his foot on the prostrate body
of Satyaki and sword upraised to slay him. Before Bhurisravas could
deliver the fatal thrust, Arjuna shot an arrow which went with the speed of
lightning and the next momen t the uplifted arm fell chopped  off to the
ground still holding the sword.  Bhurisravas, all amazed, turned and saw
who had done it.
“Son of Kunti,” he exclaimed, “I had not expected this of you! It befits not
a warrio r to shoot from behind  in this manner . I was engaged in combat
with someone else and you have attacked me without notice. Indeed, then,
no man can resist the evil influence of the company he keeps, as your
unchivalrous conduct proves. Dhananjaya, when you go ask to your brother
Dharmaputra, what account are you going to give him of this valorous
deed? Ah! Who  taught you this low trick, Arjuna? Did you learn this from
your father Indra or from your teachers Drona and Kripa? What code of
conduct was it that permitted you to shoot your arrow at a man who was
engaged in combat with another and could not so much as turn his eyes on
you? You have done the deed of a low-bred fellow and foully besmirched
your honour . You must have been instigated into it by the son of Vasudeva.
It was not in your own nature to do it. No one with princely blood in his
veins would think of such a dastardly deed. I know you have been incited to
it by that contem ptible Krishna.” Thus did Bhurisravas with his right arm
cut of f, bitterly denounce Krishna and Arjuna in the Kurukshetra field.
Said Partha: “Bhurisravas, you are old and age seems to have affected your
judgment. You accuse Hrishikesa and me without cause. How could I look
on doing  nothin g, when, before my eyes, you were in the act of killing my
friend, who came and risked his life in battle on my behalf, one who was
like a right hand to me, and whom you were going to stab when he was
lying helpless on the ground? I would have deserved to go to hell if I had
failed to intervene. You say, I have been ruined by keeping company with
Madhava. Who in the wide world would not wish to be so ruined ? You have
spoken out of confused understanding, Satyaki who was weary andexhausted when  he came here and who was inadequately armed, was
challenged by you to give battle. You overcame him. Having been defeated,
he lay on the ground, powerless. What code of honour enabled you to raise
your sword to thrust it into the body of the fallen warrior and slay him? Do
I not remember how you cheered the man who killed my boy Abhimanyu
when he stood staggering, exhausted and weapon-less, his coat of armour
torn of f?”
Bhurisravas who heard this did not answer but spread his arrows on the
ground with his left hand and made a seat for meditation. The old warrior
sat in yoga and the sight deeply moved all the Kaurava soldiers. They
cheered Bhurisravas and uttered reproaches against Krishna and Arjuna.
Arjuna spoke: “Brave men, I am sworn to protect every friend within bow-
shot of me and I cannot let an enemy kill him. It is my sacred pledge. Why
do you blame me? It is not right to hurl reproaches without due thought.”
After saying this to the warriors  in the field who reproached him, he turned
to Bhurisravas and said: “O excellent among brave men, you have protected
many who have gone to you for help. You know that what has happened is
due to your own error . There is no justice in blaming me. If you like, let us
all blame the violence which governs kshatriya life.”
Bhurisravas, who heard this, lowered his head in salutation.
Satyaki now recovered consci ousness and rose. Carried away by the
impetuosity of his passion, he picked up a sword and, advancing to
Bhurisravas, sitting in yoga on his seat of arrows, even when all around
were shouting in horror and before Krishna and Arjuna, who rushed to the
spot, could prevent him, with one swift and powerful cut, he struck off the
old warrior ’s head which rolled down, while the body was still in the
posture of medit ation. The gods and the siddhas, who looked on from above
the battlefield, uttered blessing s on Bhurisravas. Everyone in the field
condemned Satyaki’ s act.
Satyaki maintain ed he was right, saying: “After I fell down senseless, this
enemy of my family placed his foot on my prostrate figure and attempted to
kill me. I may slay him in whatever posture he might choose to be.” But
none approved of his conduct.The slaying of Bhurisravas is one of the many situations of moral conflict
woven into the story of the Mahabharata to demonstrate that, when hatred
and anger have been roused, codes of honour and dharma are powerless to
control them.CHAPTER LXXXIX: JAYADRATHA SLAIN
“THE decisive hour has come, Karna,” said Duryodhana. “If before
nightfall this day Jayadratha is not slain, Arjuna will be disgraced and he
will kill himself, for not having redeemed his oath. With Arjuna’ s death, the
destruction of the Pandavas is certain and this kingdom will be ours in
unquestioned and absolute sovereignty . Dhananjaya swore this impossible
oath in a moment of thoughtless ness, because the gods had willed it that he
should be thus destroyed by his own hand. It seems my stars are now in the
ascendant. We should not let this opportunity slip. We must see somehow
that his challeng e fails. The whole thing depends on you. Your great skill in
battle is on trial today . Prove yourself this day. See, the sun has sloped
down in the west. Within the little time left before nightfall, I do not think it
possible for Partha to reach Jayadratha. Y ou, Aswatthama, Salya, Kripa, and
I must guard Jayadratha and do all we can to see that he does not fall into
Arjuna’ s hands during the next few hours before sunset.”
“My king,” Karna replied, “I have been wounded all over by Bhimasena,
and am so weary that my limbs have no power in them; still, I shall put
forth all the strength that is in me. I only live to serve you.”
When Karna and Duryodhana were thus planning, Arjuna was engaged in a
great attack on the Kaurava army and putting forth all his strength, so that
before sunset he could break through to Jayadratha.
Krishna put his Panchajanya in his mouth and blew a loud note in the
rishabha swara, which was the signal for his own charioteer Daruka to
arrive at once with his chariot. When it came, Satyaki took his place in it,
and attacked Karna vigorously and skilfully , keeping him fully engaged.
Daruka’ s master y of driving and Satyaki’ s archery were such as brought
down the gods to witness the combat. Karna’ s four chariot horses were
disabled and the charioteer was unseated. Then the flagstaf f was cut as
under and the chariot was smashed. The great Karna stood chariotless and
the event produced a great flutter in the Kaurava army . Karna had to run
and climb up into Duryodhana’ s chariot. Sanjaya here tells Dhritarashtra towhom he was relating the incident: “The greatest adepts in archery are
Krishna, Partha and Satyaki. There is not a fourth to match them!"
Arjuna broke through the Kaurava opposition and reached Jayadratha.
Inflamed by the thought of the slaughter of Abhimanyu, and all the great
wrongs inflicted by the Kauravas, Arjuna fought with fury. Savyasachin as
he was, be dischar ged shafts from the Gandiva, now using one hand and
now the other , and struck terror and confusion among his enemies, who felt
as if Death had come to the battlefield with wide-open jaws.
It is only the poet of the Mahabharata that can describe the combat that
raged between Arjuna and Aswatthama and the other great warriors that
protected the king of Sindhu. They fought fiercely but were all defeated and
could not prevent Arjuna from reaching Jayadratha.
The attack on Jayadratha began and the battle raged long. Both sides were
constantly looking westwards, for the day was nearing its end. The
Saindhava was no mean foe, and taxed to the full, Arjuna’ s strength and
skill were hard put to it. The sun sank towards the horizon and reddened,
but the battle did not cease.
“There is but a very little time left. It seems Iayadratha has been saved and
Arjuna’ s challen ge has failed. The vow is unfulfilled and Arjuna  is going to
be disgraced,” said Duryodhana to himself in great glee.
Then, there was darkness and the cry went round in both armies: “It is
sunset and Jayadratha has not been killed. Arjuna has lost.” The Pandavas
were depressed and there were shouts of joy in the Kaurava army .
Jayadratha turne d to the western horizon and thought within himself, “I am
saved!” for he did not see the sun then and thought the time-lim it of danger
from Arjuna was over .
At that moment, however , Krish na said to Arjuna: “Dhananjaya, the Sindhu
raja is looking at the horizon. I have caused this darkness. The sun is still up
and has not set. Do your work. This is the moment for it, for Jayadratha is
off his guard.”
A shaft flew from the Gandiva, and, like a vulture swooping down on a
chicken, carried away Jayadratha’ s head.“Listen, Arjuna,” cried Krishna , “send your shafts in swift relays, so that
the head may be supported from falling to the earth and home into
Vriddhakshatra’ s lap.”
And Arjuna sent his wonderful arrows which carried away the head in the
air. It was a strange sight.
Vriiddhakshatra was in his ashrama sitting in the open absorbed in his
evening meditation with eyes closed, when his son’s head with beautiful
black hair and golden ear-rings gently dropped into his lap. The old king
finished his meditation and got up, when the head rolled down and fell on
the ground. And, as ordained, Vriddhakshatra’ s head burst into a hundred
fragments. Jayadratha and his father together reached the abode of the
brave.
Kesava, Dhanan jaya, Bhima, Satyaki, Yudhamanyu and Uttam aujas blew
their conchs and Dharmaraja who heard the triumphant noise knew that it
meant that Arjuna had redeemed his oath and that the Saindhava had been
slain. Then, Yudhishthira led his army fiercely against Drona. It was
nightfall, but, on the fourteenth  day of the battle the rule of cease-fire at
sunset was not observed. As the passions rose from day to day, one by one
the rules and restraints broke down.CHAPTER XC: DRONA PASSES AWAY
ALL those who have heard the story of the Mahabharata know about
Ghatotkacha, Bhimasena’ s famous son by his asura wife. There are two
young men among the Mahabharata figures who embody all the qualities of
heroism, fortitud e, strength, courage, and amjability . They are Arjuna’ s son,
Abhimanyu, and Bhima’ s son, Ghatotkacha. Both of them gave up their
lives on the Kurukshetra battlefield.
Towards the latter part of the Mahabharata fight, the hatred roused on both
sides did not find satisfaction in battle conducted during the daytime and
close at nightfall. On the fourteenth day, when the sun set, they did not
cease fighting but went on with it in torchlight. The Kurukshetra field
presented a strange sight, the like of which had not been seen before in
Bharata Desa. The generals and soldiers on both sides were engaged in
battle, with thousands of torches burning and using signals specially
devised for night-time.
Ghatotkacha and his troops of asuras who are strongest at night, found
darkness an additional advantage and violently attacked Duryodhana’ s
army . Duryodhana’ s heart sank within him when he saw thousands of his
men destroyed by Ghatotkacha and his demon army moving in the air and
attacking in weird and unexpected ways.
“Kill this fellow  at once, Karna , for otherwise, soon our whol e army will
cease to be. Finish him without further delay .” Thus begged all the
perplexed Kauravas of Karna.
Karna was hims elf angry and bewildered, having just been wounded by one
of the asura's arrows. He had with him no doubt the spear of unerring effect
which Indra had given to him, but it could be used only once, and he had
carefully husbanded it for exclusive use on Arjuna with whom a decisi ve
encounter he knew was inevitab le. But in the confusion and wrath of that
eerie midnight melee, Karna, impelled by a sudden urge, hurled  the missile
at the young giant.
Thus was Arjuna saved, but at great cost. Bhima’ s beloved son,
Ghatotkacha, who from mid-ai r was showering his deadly arrows on theKaurava army , dropped dead, plunging the Pandavas in grief.
The battle did not stop. Drona spread fear and destruction in the Pandava
army by his relentless attacks.
“O Arjuna,” said Krishna, “there  is none that can defeat this Drona, fighting
according to the strict rules of war. We cannot cope with him unless dharma
is discar ded. We have no other way open. There is but one thing that will
make him desist  from fighting. If he hears that Aswatthama is dead, Drona
will lose all interest in life and throw down his weapons. Someone must
therefore tell Drona that Aswatthama has been slain.”
Arjuna shrank in horror at the proposal as he could not bring himself to tell
a lie. Those who were nearby with him also rejected the idea,  for no one
was minded to be a party to deceit.
Yudhishthira stood for a while reflecting deeply . “I shall bear the burden of
this sin,” he said and resolved the dead-lock!
It was strange. But when the ocean was churned at the begin ning of the
world and the dread poison rose threatening to consume the gods, did not
Rudra come forward to swallow  it and save them? To save the friend who
had wholly depended on him, Rama was driven to bear the sin of killing
Vali, in disregar d of the rules of fairplay . So also, now did Yudhishthira
decide to bear the shame of it, for there was no other way .
Bhima lifted his iron mace and brought it down on the head  of a huge
elephant called Aswatthama and it fell dead. After killing the elephant
Aswatthama, Bhimasena went near the division commanded by Drona and
roared so that all might hear. “I have killed Aswatthama!” Bhim asena who,
until then, had never done or even contemplated an ignoble act, was, as he
uttered these words, greatly ashamed.
They knocked against his very heart-but could they be true? Drona heard
these words as he was in the act of dischar ging a brahmastra. “Yudhishthira,
is it true my son has been  slain?” Dronacharya asked addressing
Dharmaputra. The acharya thought that Yudhishthira would not utter an
untruth even for the kingship of the three worlds.When Drona asked thus, Krishna was terribly perturbed. “If Yudhishthira
fails us now and shrinks from uttering an untruth, we are lost. Drona’ s
brahmastra is of unquenchable potency and the Pandavas will be
destroyed,” he said.
And Yudhishthira himself stood trembling in horror of what he was about to
do, but within him also was the desire to win. “Let it be my sin,” he said to
himself and hardened his heart and said aloud: “Yes, it is true that
Aswatthama has been killed.” But, as he was saying it, he felt again the
disgrace of it and added in a low and tremulous voice, “Aswatthama, the
elephant”- words which were however drowned in the din and were not
heard by Drona.
“O king, thus was a great sin committed," said Sanjaya to the blind
Dhritarashtra, while relating the events of the battle to him.
When the words  of untruth came  out of Yudhishthira’ s mouth, the wheels of
his chariot, which until then always stood and moved four inches above the
ground and never touched it, at once came down and touched the earth.
Yudhishthira, who till then had stood apart from the world so full of untruth,
suddenly became of the earth, earthy . He too desired victory and slipped
into the way of untruth and so his chariot came down to the common road
of mankind.
When Drona heard that his beloved son had been slain, all his attachment to
life snapped, and desire vanishe d as if it had never been there. When the
veteran was in that mood, Bhimasena loudly spoke indicting him in harsh
words:
“You brahmanas, abandoning the legitimate functions of your varna and
taking to the kshatriya professio n of arms, have brought ruin to princes. If
you brahmanas had not gone astray from the duties belonging to you by
birth, the princes would not have  been led to this destruction. You teach that
non-killing is the highest dharma  and that the brahmana is the supporter and
nourisher of that dharma. Y et, you have rejected that wisdom which is yours
by birth , and shamelessly undertaken the profession of killing. It was our
misfortune that you descended to this sinful life.”These taunts of Bhimasena caused excruciating pain to Drona who had
already lost the will to live. He threw his weapons away and sat down in
yoga on the floor of his chariot and was soon in a trance. At this moment
Dhrishtadyumna, with drawn sword, came and climbed in to the chariot and
heedless of cries of horror and deprecation from all around he fulfilled his
destiny as the slayer of Drona by sweeping off the old warrior ’s head. And
the soul of the son of Bharadwaja issued out in a visible blaze of light and
mounted heaven-wards.
The Mahabharata is a great and wonderful story . The sorrows of human life
are painted with sublime beauty  and rolled out in a grand panora ma. Behind
the story  of errors and sorrows the poet enables us to have a vision of the
Transcendent Reality. Thus it is that the Mahabharata, though a story , has
come to be a book of dharma. This book, in style and substance, is
altogether different from tales and romances. In modern novels, dramas and
pictures, exciting scenes are enacted, the hero passes through dangers and
difficulties and finally marries a woman whom he loves, or else everything
seems to go on happily but suddenly things go wrong and terrible
misfortune happens and the curtain drops. This is the art-scheme of
ordinary sensational stories. The Ramayana and the Mahabharata are quite a
different kind of artistic creation. When we read them, our inner being is
seized and clean sed, so to say, by being passed alternately throu gh joys and
sorrows, and we are finally lifted above both and taken to the Transcendent
and Real.CHAPTER XCI: THE DEATH OF KARNA
WHEN Drona died, the princes of the Kaurava army installed Karna as
Generalissimo. Karna stood up in his gorgeous war chariot drive n by Salya.
The dauntless confidence of his hearing and his great renown as a warrior
heartened the Kauravas. The battle again began.
Readers of the stars were consulted and the Pandavas chose the propitious
hour for grim battle. Arjuna led the attack on Karna, supported by
Bhimasena immediately behind his chariot. Duhsasana made a concentrated
attack on Bhima and sent a shower of arrows at him. Bhima chuckled and
said to himself: “I have this wretch now safe in my hands. I shall today
redeem my promise to Draupadi. Too long has my oath waited for
performance.”
As Bhim a thus bethought himself of what Duhsasana had done to Draupadi,
the ange r within him blazed up uncontrollably and throwing down all his
weapons, he jumped from his chariot and leapt upon Duhsasana like a tiger
on its prey, hurled him down and broke his limbs. “Wicked beast, is this the
wretched hand that held Draupa di by the hair? Here, I tear out the root from
your body . If there be any here wishing to help you, let him come forward
and try!” Glaring hatefully at Duryodhana as he roared this challenge,
Bhimasena tore Duhsasana’ s arm out and threw the bleeding limb on the
battlefield. And then he fulfilled  the terrible oath he had taken thirteen years
before. He sucked and drank the blood from his enemy’ s body like a beast
of prey and danced on the ensanguined field, mad with passion. “I have
done it!” he roared. “The oath I swore against this great sinner has been
redeemed. It only remains to redeem my oath as regards Duryo dhana. The
sacrificial fire is ready . Let that victim also prepare.”
The scene made  everyone shudder . Even great Karna was shake n as he saw
Bhima in this ecstasy of wrath.
“Do not flinch,” said Salya to Karna. “It does not befit you to showariy sign
that may be mistaken for fear. When Duryodhana stands quivering in
despair; it is not right that you also should lose heart. After great
Duhsasana’ s death, the army’ s hope rests solely on you. You must now bearthe full burden. Like the gallant warrior you are, seek single combat with
Arjuna, and win eternal glory on earth or the soldier ’s heaven!”
At these words, Karna recovere d his mettle. With eyes red with wrath and
unshed tears, he bade Salya drive the chariot towards Arjuna.
“Enough of fighting,” said Aswatthama addressing Duryodhana earnestly .
“Let us terminate this disastrou s enmity . Beloved friend, make peace with
the Pandavas. Stop the battle.”
“What? Did you not hear the words that the stubborn Bhima uttered when
like a ravening beast, he drank human blood and danced over my brother ’s
mangled body? What talk can there be now of peace? Why do you speak
vain words!” said Duryodhana.
Saying thus, he ordered a fresh disposition of the forces, and gave the
command for attack.
Then followed a great battle. The son of Surya sent a dazzling arrow , which
spat fire and made for Arjuna, like a serpent with its flaming double-tongue
out. Then Krishna, Arjuna’ s charioteer , at the nick of time, pressed the
vehicle down five fingers deep in the mud, so that the serpent-shaft just
missed Partha’ s head but struck off his helmet! Ariuna was red with shame
and anger and he fixed a dart on his bow to make an end of Karna. And
Karna’ s fated hour was come, and as had been foretold, the left wheel of his
chariot suddenly sank in the bloody mire. He jumpe d down on the ground
to lift the wheel up from the mud.
“Wait a minute!" he cried. “My chariot has sunk in the ground. Great
warrior as you are, and knowing  dharma as you do, you would certainly not
take unfair advantage of this accident. I shall presently set my car right and
give you all the battle you want.”
Arjuna hesitated. Karna was now somewhat perturbed on account of the
mishap. He remembered the curse that had been pronounced on him, and
again appealed to Arjuna’ s sense of honour .
Krishna interven ed. “Ha, Karna!" he exclaimed, “It is well that you too
remember that there are things like fairplay and chivalry! Now that you are
in difficulty , you remember them indeed, but when you and Duryodhanaand Duhsasana and Sakuni dragged Draupadi to the Hall of Assembly and
insulted her, how was it you forgot them utterly? You helped to inveigle
Dharmaputra, who was fond of play but was unskilled at it, to gamble, and
you cheated him. Where had your fairplay hidden itself then? Was it
fairplay to refuse to give to Yudhishthira his kingdom when according to
the pledge the twelve years of forest life and the thirteenth year incognito
were duly completed? What had happened to the dharma you appeal for
now? You consp ired with the wicked men who sought to poison and kill
Bhima. Y ou acquiesced in the plot to burn the Pandavas alive when sleeping
in the palace of wax into which they had been lured. What had happened to
dharma all that time? What did dharma tell you when violent hands were
laid on Draupad i and you were looking on enjoying the sight? Did you not
then mock at her saying: ‘Your husbands have left you unprotected, go and
marry another husband’? The tongue that was not ashamed to utter those
words now talks of chivalry . Chivalry indeed! When a mob of you
surrounded the young Abhima nyu and shamelessly slew him, was that
chivalry? Wicked man, do not talk now of chivalry and fairplay , for you
have never honoured them!”
When Krishna was denouncing him in this manner in order to urge Arjuna
to prompt action, Karna bent his head in shame and uttered not a word. He
silently ascended the chariot leaving the wheel still stuck in the mud and
took his bow and sent an arrow at Arjuna with unerring aim and such power
that it stunned him for a moment. Karna utilised the respite won, to jump
down again and hurriedly tried to lift the chariot wheel up, but the curse
was too strong for him and fortune had deserted the great warrior . The
wheel would not budge, though he strove with all his great strength. Then
he tried to recall the mantras of mighty astras he had learnt from
Parasurama, but his memory failed in the hour of his need, even as
Parasurama had foretold.
“Waste no more time, Arjuna,” cried Madhava. “Send your shaft and slay
your wicked enemy .”
Arjuna‘s mind was wavering. His hand hesitated to do what was not
chivalrous. But when Krishna said this, the poet says: “Arjuna accepted this
command of the Lord and sent an arrow which cut and severed the head ofthe Radh eya.” The poet had not the heart to impute this act to Arjuna who
was the embodim ent of nobility . It was the Lord Krishna that incited Arjuna
to kill Karna when he was vainly trying to raise his chariot out of the mud
in which it had stuck. Accordin g to the code of honour and laws of war
prevailing then, it was wholly wrong. Who could bear the respo nsibility for
breaches of dharma except the Lord Himself?
The lesson is that it is vanity to hope, through physical violence and war, to
put down wrong. The battle for right, conducted through physical force
leads to numerous wrongs and, in the net result, adharma increases.CHAPTER XCII: DURYODHANA
WHEN Duryodhana beheld Karna’ s death, his grief knew no bounds.
Kripacharya was deeply moved by Duryodhana’ s anguish of heart and said:
“Moved by ambition and greed  we placed too great a burden on friends.
They have uncomplainingly borne it and laid down their lives on the
battlefield and attained the happy regions above. There is but one course
left to you-to make peace with the Pandavas. Do not, O King,  any longer
continue this ruinous fight.”
Even at that moment of deep despair , Duryodhana did not relish this
counsel.
“Perhaps, there was a time for that, but it is long past. What talk can there
be of peace between the Pandavas and us with all this inexp iable blood
between us—the  blood of our dearest and theirs? If I surrender in order to
escape death, how can I escape the contempt of the world? What happiness
can I hope to have in a life so ignobly saved? And what joy can I hope to
find in sovereign ty, secured by a peace after my brothers and relatives have
all been slain?”
These words of Duryodhana were lustily cheered by the others. They
supported his stand and they chose Salya and gave him the supreme
command from then on. Salya was mighty of limb and as brave as any of
the warriors who had been killed. The army was arrayed under his
leadership and the battle raged fiercely .
On the side of the Pandavas, Yudhishthira now led the attack personally
against Salya. It astonished everyone to see how the man, who was till then
the very incarnation of gentleness, fought so furiously .
The battle was equal for a long while, when Yudhishthira hurled at Salya,
his spear which went straight and struck him. Like the great flagstaf f at the
end of a festive function, Salya’ s body lay lifeless on the field, crimson with
blood.
When Salya, the last of the great generals, fell dead, the Kaurava army lost
all hope. The surviving sons of Dhritarashtra, however , joined together and
attacked Bhima from all sides. He slew them all. The son of Vayu hadnourished his burning anger for thirteen years from the time Draupadi was
insulted in the Hall of Assembly , He said to himself now: “I have not lived
in vain, but Duryodhana still lives,” and smiled grimly .
Sakuni led the attack on Saha deva’ s division. After a while, Sahadeva
dischar ged a sharp-edged sword -arrow saying: “Fool, here is the reward for
your great sin.” It went straight and cut through Sakuni’ s neck like a sword
and the head, which was at the root of all the wicked deeds of the Kauravas,
rolled on the ground.
Left leaderless, the wreck of the broken army scattered and fled in all
directions, pursued and slaughtered to a man by the exulting victors. “Thus
utterly was destroyed thine army of eleven Akshauhinis, O Bharata: out of
the thousands of kings, who espoused thy cause in their pride  and might,
only Duryodhan a could be seen on that battlefield, fainting and sore
wounded,” said Sanjaya, describing the debacle to the blind king.
After doing, in vain, all he could to rally his defeated army , Duryodhana,
left almost alone, took up his mace and walked towards a pool of water . His
whole frame was burning like fire, and water attracted him. “The wise
Vidura knew what would happe n and he told us,” he said to himself, as he
entered the water .
Of what  avail is wisdom that comes too late? What has been done must
produce its result which has to be suf fered. That is the law .
Yudhishthira and his brothers arrived there in relentless pursuit of their
great enemy .
“Duryodhana!” exclaimed Yudhishthira, “after destroying family and tribe,
would you yourself escape death by concealing yourself in this pond?
Where is your pride now? Have you no shame? Come up and fight. A
kshatriya by birth, do you shrink battle and death?”
Stung to the quick by these words, Duryodhana replied with dignity: “I
have not come here, Dharmaput ra, a fugitive for my life. It was not fear that
brought me here. I stepped into the water to cool the fire that is raging
within me. I neither fear death nor wish to live, but why should I fight? The
earth has now nothing left that I came to fight for! All those who stood byme have been slain. My desire for kingdom is gone. I leave the world to you
without a rival. Enjoy it in undisputed sovereignty .”
“Now , that is really generous, especially after you said you would not allow
us even a needl e point of land.  When we begged for peace and entreated
you to give us a portion, you spurned our proposal. Now , you say we may
take it all. It is not for kingdom or land that we fight. Must I recount all
your sins? The wrongs you did us, and the outrage you perpetrated on
Draupadi, cannot be expiated except with your life.”
Sanjaya, who related the events to the blind old king, here said: “When your
son Duryodhana heard these harsh and cruel words spoken by Dharmaputra,
he at once rose from the water , mace in hand.”
Stepping out of the pool, the unfortunate Duryodhana said: “Come, one by
one, all of you, for I am single. You five will surely not join together and
attack me who am alone and without armour , weary and wounded all over .”
Yudhishthira replied sharply: “If indeed it be wrong for many to join
together and attack a single person, pray tell us how Abhimanyu was
attacked and killed? Did you not consent to many combining and attacking
that boy, standing all alone amidst your crowd? Yes, when men face
misfortune, they see and preach  dharma and chivalry to others . Wear your
coat of armour . Choose any of us you like and fight. Die and go to swarga
or win and be king.”
Accordingly , the combat began between Bhima and Duryodhana. Sparks of
fire flew when their maces clashed. Duryodhana and Bhima were equal in
strength and skill, and the battle raged long, and the issue hung doubtful.
Those, who stood watching, were debating as to who would win. Krishna
said to Arjuna that Bhima would redeem the oath he swore in the Hall of
Assembly and smash Duryodhana’ s thighs. Bhima heard this and, at that
moment, the memory of the great outrage came vividly to his mind. He
leaped like a lion and came down with his mace on Duryodhana’ s thighs
and broke them and Duryodhana fell heavily on the ground, wounded to
death. Bhima jumped, on the prostrate body of his enemy , stam ped on his
head with his heavy foot and danced a terrible dance.“Cease, Bhima ,” cried Dharmaraja. “You have paid off the debt.
Duryodhana is a prince and a cousin. It is not right to put your foot on his
head.” Said Krishna: “Soon the wicked man’ s soul will depa rt from the
body . Sons of Pandu, Duryodhana and his friends have been slain. Why
linger here? On to your chariots.”
When Krishna said this, the face of the fallen Duryodhana glowed like a
blazing fire with anger and hatred. Turning his eyes towards Krishna he
said: “By base tricks you contrived the death of warriors, who fought
bravely accordin g to the laws of war. You could not have dreamt of victory
in fair fight with Karna or Bhishma or Drona. Have you not a spark of
shame let.”
Even dying, Duryodhana felt no regret for all that he had one.
“Duryodhana,” said Krishna, “vainly do you accuse others. Greed and pride
of power led you to unnumbered wicked deeds and you are reaping as you
sowed.”
“Wretch!” replied Duryodhana . “Living, I was a great prince, generous
friend, and a terrible foe. All human joys, such joys as kings wish for in
vain, and even Gods do not despise, have been mine, in their fullness, and
warrior ’s death is the fitting crown of such a life. Dying, I go triumphantly
to swarg to join my friends and my brothers who have gone there already
and are waiting  to welcome me. You remain here below , your objects
defeated and yourselves the object of contempt of all kshatriy as. I do not
mind Bhima putting his foot on my head as I lie helpless on the ground with
legs broken. What care I? In a few minutes more will not the feet of crows
and vultures settle on my head?”  When Duryodhana said this, flowers were
showered down  from the heavens by the gods. Inordinate desire took
Duryodhana into the wrong path, whence ensued anger and numerous
breaches of dharma; but no one could question the unconquerable spirit of
Dhritarashtra’ s son.CHAPTER XCHIII: THE PANDAVAS
REPROACHED
WHEN the war was nearing its end, Balarama arrived at Kurukshetra after
completing his tour of holy places. He came just when Bhima and
Duryodhana were engaged in their last mortal combat. He saw Bhima
aiming the deadly blow which broke Duryodhana’ s thighs, and his anger
flamed up at this great breach of the rules of single combat.
“Fie upon you all! Would any kshatriya hit below the navel? This, Bhima
has offended the law most disgracefully ,” he exclaimed and impatiently
going up to his brother Krishna, shouted: “You can look on and tolerate all
this, but I cann ot hear to see such unclean fighting!” Saying this he
advanced towar ds the offending Bhima with upraised plough. The plough
was Balarama’ s weapon on supreme occasions, as the discus was Krishna’ s.
Krishna was alarmed when he saw his elder brother advancing in a passion
towards Bhima . He rushed forward and, intercepting him, said: “The
Pandavas are our friends and closest relations. They have been the victims
of insuf ferable wrongs at the hands of Duryodhana. When Draupadi was
insulted in the Assembly Hall, Bhima vowed: ‘I will one day in battle break
the two thighs of Duryodhana with this mace and kill him.’ He proclaimed
this solemn oath at that time and every one has known it. It is the duty of a
kshatriya to fulfil the vow he has solemnly taken. Do not let your anger
mislead you and do not be unjust to the innocent Pandavas. You should,
before condemning Bhima, take into account all the wrongs that the
Kauravas have done to the Pandavas. Nothing but error can result if one
proceeds to judge conduct without taking into account the chain of events
leading up to it. You cannot snatch a particular act out of its context and
proceed to give judgment on it alone without gross injustice. The era of
Kali has arrived, when the laws of a previous age cannot apply . It was not
wrong for Bhim a to strike below the navel an enemy who had wickedly
contrived against his life on many occasions. It was because of
Duryodhana’ s foul instigation that Karna sent a shaft from behind and broke
Abhimanyu’ s bowstring when he was defending himself against heavy
odds. Arjuna’ s young son was attacked by numerous warriors whosurrounded him, when he stood all by himself in the field, deprived of bow
and chariot, and in a most cowardly manner , killed him. Duryodhana
thought evil and practised deception from the time of his birth and has
brought about the destruction of his people. There is no sin in Bhima killing
this man. Bhima  bore the wron gs done and kept his wrath within himself
for thirteen long years. Duryod hana knew well that Bhima had sworn to
break his thighs  and kill him. When he challenged the aggrieve d Pandavas
to battle, he knew very well that he invited Bhima to make good his oath.
How can you think that it was wrong for Bhima to do this?”
Krishna’ s words did not change Balarama’ s opinion, but his anger subsided.
“Duryodhana will attain the happy regions reserved for the brave. Bhima’ s
fame has been tarnished for all time. It will be said among men that the son
of Pandu broke the laws of war in attacking Duryodhana. It will remain
forever a great blot on his good name. I hate to stay here any longer .” So
saying the indignant Balarama immediately left for Dwaraka.
“Yudhishthira, why this strange silence?” asked Krishna.
“O Madhava, it hurt me to see Bhima leap on cousin Duryodhana’ s mortally
wounded body and trample on his head. I see the end of the glory of our
race. We were wronged by the Kauravas. I know the full meas ure of grief
and anger in Vrikodara’ s heart, and don’t wish to blame him beyond reason.
We have killed Duryodhana, who was afflicted by incontinent and poverty
of understanding; what boots it now to debate the ethics of it or nicely to
weigh the propriety of a much wronged man’ s revenges?”
Yudhishthira was greatly oppressed in mind. When men transgress the law,
extenuations and excuses are of no avail in giving mental satisfaction.
Arjuna, of penetrating intellect, was silent. He did not show approval of
Bhima’ s act. Nor did he say anything by way of detraction. The rest of the
people, who were there, were however loud in condemnation of
Duryodhana and were reminding one another of all his misdeeds and errors.
Krishna turned towards them and said: “Warriors, it is not meet we go on
declaiming against an enemy who has been defeated and is lying mortally
wounded. We should not speak ill of a dying man. He was stupid andbrought about his own end. He fell into the company of bad men and was
ruined. Let us go.”
Duryodhana, who was stretched  on the ground in intense agony , when he
heard Krishna say this, went into a paroxysm of rage. He half raised himself
on his arms in spite of the excru ciating pain, and exclaimed: “Wretch! Son
of a slave! Was not your father Vasudeva Kamsa’ s slave? You have no
business to sit or move with princes. You speak like a shameless wretch. I
saw you instigate Bhima to aim his blow at my thigh! Do you think I did
not see you, making as though casually talking to Arjuna, pointing to your
thigh, but really  indicating to Bhima that he should strike me on the thighs,
disregarding the laws of single combat? Till then, it had been equal battle.
You have neither pity nor shame. Did you not contrive the death of the
grandsire Bhishma through stratagem? You advised Sikhandin to be placed
in front when attacking Bhishma, knowing that the grandsire would scorn to
fight a woman and would let himself be mortally wounded without
resistance. You brought about the end of Dronacharya throu gh making
Dharmaputra utter a falsehood. You were the father of that deadly lie that
issued from Yudhishthira’ s mouth, and made Dronacharya throw his bow
away . Did you not look on without protest, and rejoice, when that wretch
Dhrishtadyumna attacked and killed the acharya who had stopped fighting,
throwing away his weapons, and settled down in yoga posture for
meditation on the Supreme? Was it not you who wickedly contrived to
make Karna hurl the fatal spear  at Ghatotkacha instead of reserving it for
Arjuna as he had all along resol ved to do? O great sinner , surely it was you
who instigated Satyaki to butcher Bhurisravas when his right arm had been
foully cut off and he stopped fighting and spread his arrows for a seat for
holy meditation . It was you who brought about the death of Karna by
inducing Arjuna to attack him in a cowardly manner when he was engaged
in lifting his chariot wheel which had sunk and stuck in the mud in the field
of battle. Oh worthless man, sole cause of our destruction, the whole world
has condemned your act when, by sorcery you made it appear as if the sun
had set, and made Jayadratha, the Sindhu king, believe that the day was
over and he was past danger , and thus he was slain when he was off his
guard.”Thus did Duryodhana pour his denunciation against Krishna and then,
exhausted by the pain of his wounds and the violence of his rage, he fell
prostrate again.
“Son of Gandha ri,” said Krishna, “why do you let your anger add to the
pain of your last moments? It is your own misdeeds that have brought about
your end. Do not attribute it to me. Bhishma and Drona had to die on
account of your sins. So also were you the cause of the death of Karna and
others. Need I recount all the wrongs that you were guilty of against the
sons of Pandu? What punishme nt can be too severe for the great outrage
which you inflicted on Draupadi? The animosities and passions that
resulted from your misdeeds cannot be made ground for condemning
others. All the deceptions and lapses you charge us with were forced on us
by reaso n of your wicked condu ct. You have paid off on the battlefield the
debt incurred by your greed. But you are dying the death of a brave man.
You will go to the happy regions reserved for kshatriyas who lay down their
lives on the field of battle.”
“Krishna, I go to swarga with my friends and relatives. But you and your
friends will live on earth to suf fer,” said the stubborn Duryodhana.
“I studied the Vedas. I have given gifts ordained by law and I have reigned
supreme over all the sea-girt earth. While I lived, I stood upon the humbled
heads of foes. All human joys, such joys as even the Gods cannot despise
and kings sigh for in vain, the very pinnacle of power , were mine. Dying
now, such death as warriors deem the crown of kshatriya life, I go to meet
in heaven my friends and brothers gone before, eager to welcome me. Who
is more blest, I, or you who, doomed to linger here, mourning for
slaughtered friends in desolate homes, find the long sought triumph but
ashes in your mouth?” said Duryodhana and the gods showered flowers
down on the dying warrior and the gandharvas played music and the sky
was illuminated. V asudeva and the Pandavas felt small.
“There is truth,” said Krishna, “in what Duryodhana said. You could not
have defeated him by fair means. This wicked man was invincible in
battle.”CHAPTER XCIV: ASWATTHAMA
WHEN Aswatthama heard how Duryodhana lay mortally injured, and
learnt the detail s of the comba t, his righteous anger swelled like the sea.
The deception, practised by the Pandavas in order to bring about his father ’s
end, had been rankling in his mind. Now , when he learnt how Duryodhana
had been stricken down mortally against all rules of chivalry , he went to the
spot where Duryodhana was lying and there took an oath that he would that
night send the Pandavas to the abode of Y ama.
Duryodhana, who was in the last physical agony of departing life, was
transported with joy when he heard Aswatthama take this oath. He
immediately ordered those who stood nearby to install Aswatthama as
Supreme Commander of the Army with due ceremony and, when that was
over, said to Him: “All my hopes are in you.”
It was sunset and the forest was in utter darkness when under a big banian
tree Kripacharya, Kritavarma and Aswatthama halted for rest. They were so
greatly fatigued that Kripachary a and Kritavarma fell fast asleep as soon as
they lay down. But Aswatthama did not get sleep, for sorrow , indignation
and hatred burnt within him. He was listening to the noises that the
nocturnal birds and prowling beasts began to make as the night advanced,
as he was turning over in his mind how to execute his promise to
Duryodhana.
On the branche s of the banian tree, under which the three warriors were
resting, hundred s of crows roosted. They were all quiet and asleep until a
big owl came and began to attac k the birds one after another and kill them.
When Aswattha ma saw the nocturnal bird of prey tear the helpless crows,
he got an idea. The crows that could not see at night flew round and round
helplessly and fell victims to the owl that attacked them violently .
“These wicked Pandavas and the Panchala that killed my father and all their
supporters can easily be killed by us, if we surprise them when they are
sleeping in their tents at night  even as this owl is attacking these blind
crows. Thus can I avenge the deeds of foul play they have practised on us. I
am deeply bounden to this bird of prey from whom I have received theteaching. There  is no offence in adopting plans to suit one’s altered
circumstances. If we can lawful ly attack an enemy , when his army is tired
or when his forces are scattered, why then should not we, who have lost our
armies, attack our enemies when they are asleep? There can be nothing
wrong in it. Indeed it is only thus that we can punish and defeat these
Pandavas who have achieved successes through foul play. We have no other
course open.”
Aswatthama made up his mind and he immediately woke up Kripacharya
and informed him of his plan. Kripacharya, who heard it, was astonished.
“This can never be,” said he. “It is wholly wrong. To attack men who have
retired to sleep, has never been done before. It would be an unprecedented
crime against the laws of kshatriya conduct. Aswatthama, for whom are we
fighting? The man for whose sake we joined in this war has been fatally
wounded and his end has arrived. We have dischar ged our obligations most
loyally . We fought our best for the greedy and wrongheaded Duryodhana
but we failed irretrievably . “The re is no purpose now in our continuing the
fight and it is folly to do so. Let us go to Dhritarashtra and the faultless
Gandhari and place ourselves at their disposal. Let us take counsel of wise
Vidura also. They will tell us what lies before us to do.”
When Kripacharya spoke thus, Aswatthama’ s grief and indignation
increased and he spoke bitterly:
“Everyone feels  sure that what he thinks is the only right and proper thing
to do. One’ s understanding naturally limits one’s vision. Thes e Pandavas
have been guilty of the foulest conduct. They killed my noble and trustful
father through a lie. They have killed Duryodhana against the laws of
chivalry . I have no doubt in my mind that what I propose to do is quite
proper vengeanc e for all these foul deeds. It is only if I carry out this plan
that l can possibly repay my debt to my king and to my father . I have
decided on it and I do not propose to alter my plan. I am going tonight to
the tents where they are sleepin g having cast off their armour and there I
will kill the Pandavas and Dhrishtadyumna while they are asleep.”
Kripacharya was deeply grieved to hear Aswatthama speak thus: “You have
attained a great name among men,” he pleaded. “Your spotless characterwill by this be blemished, even like a milk-white cloth bespa ttered with
blood. Never could it be right to kill sleeping men. Desist from this.”
“Sir, what are you talking? These Pandavas butchered my father when he
had thrown away all his weapo ns and had sat down in prayer . These men
have breached the embankment  of dharma and released the flood, and not
‘a’ drop of dharma is now left! Karna, who was on the ground putting right
the wheel of his chariot, was murdered by these lawless rascals. Bhima has
killed Duryodhana with a blow below the navel. What dharma has been left
for us to follow? The Pandavas have, once for all, destroyed the barrage of
dharma. Why should we make research into law and chivalry when dealing
with these ruffians who have attained successes by destroying both? If by
killing the sleeping Panchalas, who butchered my great father , I may be
doomed to re-birth in the body of a foul bird or of a wriggling worm, I do
not care. I seek such a birth!” Saying this and, without waiting for an
answer , Aswatthama proceeded to harness his horses and get his chariot
ready to start. When he was about to leave, Kripacharya and Kritavarma
cried: “Stop. What are you resolved upon doing, Aswatthama? We cannot
approve of it, but neither can we desert you in your desperate  enterprise.
The path you are bent on tread ing, we shall also follow . The sin you are
resolved upon, let us share also.” So, they went along with him.
Thus does evil grow! One transgression begets the next and thus evil grows
from evil submer ging righteousness. Evil flourishes on retaliation.
They reached the Pandava camp. Dhrishtadyumna had dotted  his armour
and was plunged in deep slumber in his tent. Aswatthama leapt on the
sleeping warrior  and, before he could put himself into a posture of defence,
cruelly kicked him to death.
The same process was relentlessly repeated until all the Panch alas and all
the sons of Draupadi were killed one by one when they were plunged in
sleep in their tents. After having done this deed, the like of which had never
before been considered possible among kshatriyas, Kripacharya,
Kritavarma and Aswatthama came out of the tents and set fire to the camp.
When the fire spread, the sleeping soldiers were awakened and fled hither
and thither in confusion, even like the crows on the banian tree under whichthey had rested in the forest, and they were mercilessly slaughtered by
Aswatthama.
“We have done our duty,” said Dronacharya’ s son. “Let us go and give the
glad news to Duryodhana, if we can reach him before he expires. Let him
die pleased.”
The three of them accordingly hurried to Duryodhana.CHAPTER XCV: AVENGED
“O, DUR YODH ANA, you are yet alive—hear the news and rejoice! All the
Panchalas have been slaughtered. The sons of the Pandavas have also been
all done to death. The entire army of theirs has been destroyed. We made a
night attack on them when they were asleep. There are only seven survivors
now on the Pandava side. On our side, Kripacharya, Kritav arma and I
remain.”
Thus said Aswatthama to the dying Duryodhana who on hearing this,
slowly opened his eyes and, with struggling breath, gasped out these words:
“Aswatthama, you have indeed done for me What neither the great
Bhishma nor the valiant Karna could achieve! Y ou have gladdened my heart
and I die happy .” Saying this, Duryodhana expired.
When he saw the unexpected destruction of his army as a result of the
attack during sleep, Y udhishthira gave way to grief and broke down:
“At the very moment of victory, we have been totally defeated. The
vanquished have indeed triumphed. Draupadi’ s children, who survived the
onslaught of the formidable Karna, have, by our unwariness, been crushed
and destroyed like vermin. We have allowed ourselves to be destroyed like
a merchantship which, having successfully crossed the big seas, returns
home but capsizes in a ditch and is lost.”
Draupadi was overwhelmed by inconsolable grief. She came to
Dharmaputra’ s side and wept. “Is there no one to avenge my children’ s
slaughter , by destroying this great sinner Aswatthama?” she cried.
When she said this, the Pandavas immediately went out in search of the
murderer . They looked for him in all sorts of places and found him, at last,
on the bank of the Ganga, hiding himself behind Vyasa. When  he saw the
Pandavas and Janardana approa ching, Aswatthama quietly took up a blade
of grass and charged it with the mantra of destruction and sent it forward
saying: “May this destroy the race of the Pandavas,” and it went straight to
the womb of Uttara who bore in her the son of Abhimanyu. The race of the
Pandavas would have been destroyed thereby but for the interve ntion of Sri
Krishna who saved the child in the mother ’s womb. This child wasParikshit who was later crowned  by Yudhishthira when the Pand avas retired
to the forest.
Aswatthama prised out the shining jewel which was part of his head and
gave it to Bhima, acknowledgin g his defeat, and went away to the forest.
Bhima took the great jewel and, going to Draupadi said: “Angel of spotless
purity , this is for you. The man, who killed your beloved sons, has been
vanquished. Duryodhana has been destroyed. I have drunk the blood of
Duhsasana. I have avenged the great outrage and dischar ged my debts.”
Draupadi took the jewel and, going up to Yudhishthira bowed and said:
“Faultless king, it befits you to wear this in your crown.”CHAPTER XCVI: WHO CAN GIVE SOLACE?
WHEN the battle was over, Hastinapura was a city of mourning: all the
women and children were weeping and lamenting their slain, nearest and
dearest. With many thousan ds of bereaved women accompanying,
Dhritarashtra went to the field of battle. At Kurukshetra, the scene of
terrible destructi on, the blind king thought of all that had passed and wept
aloud. But, of what avail was weeping?
“O king, words of consolation addressed to a bereaved person do not
remove his grief. Thousands of rulers have given up their lives in battle for
your sons. It is now time that you should arrange for proper funeral
ceremonies for the dead,” said Sanjaya to Dhritarashtra.
“It is not right to grieve for those who die in battle. When souls have left
their bodies, there is nothing like relationship, nothing like brother or son or
relative. Your sons have really no connection with you. Relationship ends
with death, being only a bodily connection and a mere minor incident in the
soul’ s eternal life. From the nowhere do lives come, and, with death, they
again disappear into nowhere. Why should we weep for them?  Those who
die in battle after a heroic fight go as guests to receive Indra’ s hospitality .
Grieving for what is past, you cannot gain anything in the nature  of dharma,
pleasure or wealth.” Thus, and in many more ways, did the wise and good
Vidura try to assuage the king’ s grief.
Vyasa also approached Dhritara shtra tenderly and said: “Dear son, there is
nothing that you do not know and which you have to learn from me. You
know very well that all living beings must die. This great battle came to
reduce earth’s burden as I have  heard from lord Vishnu Hims elf. That is
why this calamity could not be prevented. Henceforth, Yudhishthira is your
son. You should try to love him and in that way bear the burden of life,
giving up grief.”
Making his way through the crowd of weeping women Yudhishthira
approached Dhritarashtra and bowed before him. Dhritarashtr a embraced
Yudhishthira, but there was no love in that embrace.
Then Bhimasena was announced to the blind king.“Come,” said Dhritarashtra.
But Vasudeva was wise. He gently pushed Bhima aside and placed an iron
figure before the blind Dhritarashtra, knowing the old king’ s exceeding
anger; Dhritarashtra hugged the metal statue to his bosom in a firm embrace
and then the thought came to him of how this man had killed every one of
his sons, and his wrath increased  to such a pitch that the image was crushed
to pieces in his embrace.
“Ha! My anger has deceived me,” cried Dhritarashtra. “I have killed dear
Bhima.”
Then Krishna said to the blind king:
“Lord, I knew that it would be thus and I prevented the disaste r. You have
not killed Bhimasena. You have  crushed only an iron image which I placed
instead before you. May your anger be, appeased with what you have done
to this image. Bhima is still alive.”
The king was composed somew hat and he blessed Bhima and the other
Pandavas who then took leave of him and went to Gandhari.
Vyasa was with Gandhari. “Oh queen,” said the rishi, “be not angry with the
Pandavas. Did you not tell them even when the battle began: ‘Where there
is dharma, there surely will be victory’? And so it has happened. It is not
right to let the mind dwell on what is past and nurse one’s ange r. You must
now call to aid your great fortitude.”
“Bhagavan, I do not envy the victory of the Pandavas. It is true that grief for
the death of my sons has robbed  me of my understanding. Thes e Pandavas
also are my sons. I know that Duhsasana and Sakuni brough t about this
destruction of our people. Arjun a and Bhima arc blameless. Pride brought
this battle about and my sons deserve the fate they have met. Ido not
complain about it. But then, in Vasudeva’ s presence, Bhima called
Duryodhana to battle and they fought and knowing that Duryodhana was
stronger and could not be defeated in single combat, Bhima struck him
below the navel  and killed him. Vasudeva was looking on. This was wrong
and it is this that I find it impossible to for give.”
Bhima, who heard this, came near and said:“Mother , I did this to save myself in battle. Whether it was right or wrong,
you should bear with me. Your son was invincible in combat and so I did in
self-protection what was undoubtedly wrong. He called Yudhishthira to
play and deceived him. We had been wronged by your son in so many
ways. He would  not give back  the kingdom, of which he took unlawful
possession. And you know what your son did to blameless Draupadi. If we
had killed your son on the spot, when he misbehaved in the Hall of
Assembly , surely you would not have blamed us. Bound by Dharmaraja’ s
vow, we restrained ourselves with difficulty then. We have since  dischar ged
honour ’s debt and found satisfaction in battle. Mother , you should forgive
me.”
“Dear son, if you had left but one out of my hundred sons and killed all the
rest and satisfied your anger , I and my old husband would have found
solace in that surviving son for the rest of our lives. Where is Dharmaputra?
Call him,” she said .
Hearing this, Yudhishthira trembled as he, with clasped hands, approached
Gandhari, whos e eyes were bound in napkin in loyal lifelong penance for
her husband’ s blindness. He bowed low before her and said softly:
“Queen, the cruel Yudhishthira, who killed your sons, stands before you fit
to be cursed. Do curse me who have committed great sin. I care not for life
or for kingdom.” Saying this, he fell on the ground and touched her feet.
Gandhari heave d a deep sigh and stood mute. She turned her head aside
knowing that it, through the cloth with which her eyes were bound, her
vision fell on the prostrate Yudhishthira he would be reduced to ashes on
the spot. But through a little space in the napkin, even as she turned her face
away , her eyes fell on the toe of the prostrate Yudhishthira. At once, says
the poet, the toe was charred black.
Arjuna knew the power of bereaved Gandhari’ s wrath, and hid himself
behind V asudeva.
The wise and good Gandhuri suppressed all her anger and blessed the
Pandavas and sent them to Kunti.
Gandhari turned  to Draupadi, who was in lamentation, having lost all her
sons. "Dear girl,” said Gandhari, “do not grieve. Who can give solace toyou and me? It is through my fault that this great tribe has been destroyed
altogether .”CHAPTER XCVII: YUDHlSHTHlRA'S ANGUISH
THE Pandava’ s performed the til-and-water ceremonies for the peace of the
souls of the dead warriors and camped on the bank of the Ganga for a
month.
One day, Narada appeared before Yudhishthira. “Son, through Krishna’ s
grace, the valour of Arjuna and the power of your dharma, you were
victorious and you are sovereig n Lord of the Land. Are you happy?” he
asked.
Yudhishthira replied: “Bhagavan, it is true the kingdom has come into my
possession. But my kinsmen are all gone. We have lost sons that were dear.
This victory appears to me but a great defeat. O Narada, we took our own
brother for an enemy and killed  him, even Karna who stood rooted like a
rock in his honour and at whos e valour the world wondered. This terrible
act of slaying our own brothers  was the result of our sinful attachment to
our possessions. He, on the other hand, kept the promise he gave to our
mother and abstained from killing us. Oh! I am a sinner , a low fellow who
murdered his own brother . My mind is troubled greatly at this thought.
Karna’ s feet were so much like our mother ’s feet. In the large hall, when
that great outrage was committe d and my anger rose, when I looked at his
feet, which were  so much like Kunti’ s feet, my wrath subsided. I remember
that now and my grief increase s.” So saying, Yudhishthira heaved a deep
sigh. Narada told him all about Karna and the curses that had been
pronounced on him on various occasions.
Once, when Karna saw that Arjuna was superior to him in archery , he
approached Drona and entreat ed him to teach him how to wield the
Brahmastra. Drona declined saying it was not open to him to instruct any
but a brahmana of faultless conduct or a kshatriya who had purified himself
by much penance. Thereupon,  Karna went to the Mahendra hills and
deceived Parasurama by saying  that he was a brahmana and became his
disciple. From him he obtained instruction in archery and the use of many
astras.One day, when Karna was practising with his bow in the forest near
Parasurama’ s asrama, a brahmana’ s cow was accidentally hit and killed.
The brahmana was angry and uttered a curse on Karna: “In battle, your
chariot-wheels will stick in the mud and you will be done to death, even
like this innocent cow which you have killed.”
Parasurama was exceedingly fond of Karna and taught him all the archery
he knew and instructed him fully in the use and the withdra wing of the
Brahmastra. One day, however , he discovered that the disciple was not a
brahmana. It happened thus: an insect hit a hole into Karna’ s thigh when,
one afternoon the teacher had fallen asleep on Karna’ s lap. Karna bore the
acute pain quietly and did not stir lest the master should wake up. The warm
blood trickling from the wound woke up Parasurama. When he saw what
had happened, he was angry .
“You are a kshatriya; otherwise you could not have borne this physical pain
without stirring . Tell me the truth. You are not a brahmana. You have
deceived your teacher . Fool! When your hour comes, your knowledge of
astras will fail you and what you have learnt from me through deception
will not avail you.”
Parasurama’ s wrath against kshatriyas is well known and, when he
discovered that Karna was a kshatriya, he cursed him thus in his anger .
Karna was free in making gifts. One day, Indra, who was Arjuna’s father ,
came in the garb of a brahmana and begged of Karna for a gift of the divine
earrings and armour with which he had been born. Karna took them out and
gave them away accordingly . From that time, Karna’ s strength was reduced.
“Karna’ s pledge  to his mother Kunti that he would not kill more than one of
the five of you, Parasurama’ s curse, the anger of the brahmana whose oow
was killed by Karna, the way in which his charioteer Salya depressed him
by underrating his valour and Vasudeva’ s stratagems, these combined to
bring about Karna’ s end. Do not grieve believing that you alone caused his
death.” Thus said Narada, but Yudhishthira was not consoled by these
words.
“Do not blame yourself, son, for Karna’ s death," said Kunti. “His father , the
sun lord himself, pleaded with him. He begged of him to give up thewicked-hearted Duryodhana and join you. I too tried hard. But he would not
listen to us. He brought his end on himself.”
“You deceived us, mother” said Yudhishthira, “by hiding the secret of his
birth from us. You became thus the cause of this great sin. May women
never be able to keep a secret henceforth.”
This is the poet’ s story of how Yudhishthira cursed all women in his
anguish over having killed his own elder brother . It is a common notion that
women cannot keep secrets, and this story is a beautiful conception
illustrating that popular belief. It may be that in worldly affairs, it is an
advantage to be able to keep secrets, but it is not great virtue from the point
of view of mora l character , and women need not grieve over an incapacity
of this kind, if indeed Kunti’ s legacy still persists. The affectionate
temperament natural to women may perhaps incline them to openness.
But some women do keep secrets very well indeed, and not all men possess
this ability either . It is a fallacy to attribute the differences that arise out of
training and occupation on nature itself and imagine some qualities as
peculiar to sex.CHAPTER XCVIII: YUDHISHTHIRA
COMFORTED
YUDHISHTHIRA ’S pain of mind increased every day as he thought of all
the kinsmen that had been killed. He was stricken with intense remorse and
decided he must give up the world, go to the forest and do penance to
expiate his sin.
“I see no joy or good,” he said to his brothers in taking up the office of king
or in worldly enjoyment. Do rule the land yourselves leaving me free to go
to the forest.”
Arjuna talked of the nobility of family life and all the good one may do
without taking sanyasa. Bhimasena also spoke and harshly .
“You talk, alas!" he said, “like a dull-witted person who has committed to
memory the texts of the sastras without understanding their sense. Sanyasa
is not the dharm a of kshatriyas. The duty of a kshatriya is to live an active
life and perform his proper task, not to go to the forest renouncing activity .”
Nakula also contested the propriety of Dharmaputra’ s proposal and insisted
that the path of work was the right one to follow and the way of sanyasa
was beset with difficulties. Sahadeva also argued likewise and entreated:
“You are my father, my mother , my teacher , as well as brother . Do not leave
us, bear with us.”
Draupadi also spoke. “It was right we killed Duryodhana and his men. Why
should we regret it? Among the duties of a king is included the inflicting of
just punishment. It cannot be avoided and is an essential part of the ruler ’s
duty. You have meted just punishment to evil-doers. There is no cause
whatsoever for contrition. It is now your sacred duty to take up the burden
of governing the land according to dharma. Cease grieving.”
Then Vyasa spoke to Yudhishthira at length and explained where his duty
lay, pointing out precedents, and persuaded him to go to the city and take up
the burden of ruling the land.
Yudhishthira was duly crowned at Hastinapura. Before taking up the duties
of the State, Yudhishthira went to where Bhishma lay on his bed of arrowsawaiting his death, and took his blessing and instruction in dharma.
This instruction of Bhishmacharya to king Yudhishthira is the famous
Santiparva of the Mahabharata.
After the discou rse was over, Bhishma’ s soul passed out. The king went to
the Ganga and offered libations, in accordance with ancient custom, for the
peace of the departed soul. After the ceremony was over, Yudhishthira went
up the bank. There, as he stood for a while, all the tragic events came back
to his mind, and overcome by intense grief, he fell senseless on the ground,
like an elephant struck down by the hunter .
Bhima went up to his big brother and caressed him tenderly and spoke to
him soothing words. Dhritarash tra also came up and said to Yudhishthira:
“You should not grieve like this. Arise and assisted by your brothers and
friends, reign over the kingdom that awaits your rule. Your duty now is to
do what appertains to the office of king. Leave grief to me and Gandhari.
You achieved victory in battle in accordance with the dharma of warriors.
The duties apper taining to that victory await your attention now. Fool that I
was, I did not pay heed to the words of Vidura and committed a great error .
I listened to the ignorant words of Duryodhana and deceived myself. Like
gold seen in a dream the glory has vanished, my hundred sons have
disappeared into the world of nowhere. But I have you as my son now. Do
not grieve.”CHAPTER XCIX: ENVY
AFTER the libation ceremony for Bhishma was over, Vyasa narrated to
grief-stricken Y udhishthira an episode in Brihaspati’ s life.
The wisest of men are someti mes affected by envy and suffer thereby .
Brihaspati, teacher to the gods themselves, was master of all knowledge. 
He was learned in all the Vedas and all the sciences, yet he was once the
victim of this debasing emotion and suf fered disgrace.
Brihaspati had a younger brother , Samvarta, who was also a person of great
learning and a very good man. Brihaspati was, for this reason, stricken with
envy of his brother. In this world men become envious of others, just
because the others are good, while they themselves are not so good, and
they cannot hear this. It is strange indeed that men should not suffer even
virtue in others. Samvarta was harassed by Brihaspati in many ways. When
he could not stand it any more, poor Samvarta put on the appea rance of an
eccentric and wandered from place to place, and spent his days in that way
to escape from his brother ’s persecution.
King Marutta of the Ikshwaku dynasty made great penance and obtained
from the Lord of Kailasa a great gold mine in the Himalayas and, with his
resources thus augmented, he decided to perform a great yajna. Marutta
requested Briha spati to conduct the yajna for him. But Briha spati feared
that Marutta would, as a result of the yajna, overshadow the gods who were
his charge. He refused to comply with the king’ s invitation, despite his
pressing entreaties. Thereupon, king Marutta, who had come to know about
Samvarta found  his whereabouts and approached him with the invitation to
conduct his yajna. He at first refused and tried to avoid the honour , but
finally yielded. This further increased Brihaspati’ s envy of his unfortunate
brother .
“Here is this enemy of mine, Samvarta, going to conduct king Marutta’ s
great yajna. What shall I do now?” Thus did Brihaspati brood over it until
his envy affected his health. His health declined rapidly and he became thin
and pale. His condition grew worse every day, until it attracted the attention
of Indra himself.Indra, chief of the gods, approached the divine preceptor and saluting him
asked: “Lord, why are you ill? What has caused this languishi ng? Do you
sleep well? Do the attendants serve you properly? Do they anticipate your
wishes and not wait to be told? Do the gods behave courteously towards
you or has there been any lapse in this respect?”
To Indra’ s anxious inquiry , Brihaspati replied: “Devaraja, I sleep on a good
bed and in right  time. The attendants serve me with all devotion. There is
nothing wanting in the respect and courtesies shown by the gods.” Then his
voice failed and he could not proceed. So great was his prostration of spirit.
“Why are you grieved?” asked Indra affectionately . “Why have you grown
thin and bloodless? T ell me what troubles your mind.”
Brihaspati then told Indra about it all. “Samvarta is going to conduct a great
yajna. It is this that has made me wan and thin. I cannot help it,” said he.
Indra was surprised.
“Learned brahm ana, there is no object of desire that is not already yours.
You are wise and learned, and the gods themselves have accepted you as
their priest and wise counsellor . What harm can Samvarta do to you? There
is nothin g you can lose on account of him. Why do you needlessly take
upon yourself this suf fering by mere envy? ”
It was amusing that Indra should so far and so humanly forget his own
history as to give counsel of good conduct, but Brihaspati refreshed his
memory on the point and asked: “Would you yourself delightedly watch
your enemy’s power gowing? Judge me by how you would have felt had
you been in my position. I beg of you to save me against this Samvarta. You
must find a way to put this man down.”
Indra sent for Agni and said to him: “Go and stop the yajna of Marutta
somehow .”
The god of fire agreed and went  on this mission. The trees and the creepers
along his path caught fire and the earth trembled as he marched roaring. He
presented himself before the king in his divine form.
The king was mightily pleased to see Agni stand before him. He ordered the
attendants to do all the usual honours of hospitality . “Let him be dulyseated. Have his feet laved and bring the gifts proper to his greatness,” said
the king, and this was done.
Agni then explained why he had come. “Do give up this Samvarta. If you
require a priest, I shall bring Brihaspati himself to help you.”
Samvarta, who heard this, was indignant. The wrath of one who led the
strict life of a brahmacharin was exceedingly potent.
“Stop this chatter!” he said to Agni. “Do not let my anger burn you up.”
Fire reduces things to ashes, but brahmacharya can burn up fire itself!
At Samvarta’ s anger Agni, trembling like an aspen leaf, retired quickly . He
returned to Indra and told him what had happened. The king of the gods
could not believe the story . “Agni, you burn up other things in the world.
How can anythi ng burn you? What is this story of Samvarta’ s angry eyes
reducing you to ashes?”
“Not so, king of the gods,” said Agni. “Brahmic power and the potency
born of brahmacharya are not unknown to you.” Agni thus reminded Indra
of what the latter had sufffered, incurring the wrath of those who had
attained Brahmic power .
Indra did not wrangle but called a gandharva and said: “Now , Agni has
failed. I want you to go as my messenger and ask Marutta to give up
Samvarta. Tell him that if he does not, he will incur my wrath and be
destroyed.”
The gandharva went accordingl y to king Marutta and faithfully conveyed
Indra’ s message and warning.
The king would not listen. ‘‘I cannot be guilty of the deadly sin of deserting
a trusting friend,” said the king: “I cannot give up Samvarta.”
The gandharva said: “O king, how can you survive, when Indra hurls his
bolt at you?”
Even as he said this, the clouds  above thundered and everyone knew that
the god of the thunderbolt was coming, and trembled in fear .
The king was in great fear and entreated Samvarta to save him.“Fear not,” said Samvarta to the king, and he proceeded to put the power of
his pena nce into action. Indra, who had come to do battle, was compelled to
change over to benevolent peace  and to take part in the yajna as the radiant
god of sacrifices. He received the burnt of fering in proper form and retired.
Brihaspati’ s plan of envy failed miserably . Brahmacharya triumphed.
Envy is a deadly sin. It is a universal disease. If Brihaspati who could defeat
the goddess of knowledge herself in learning became a victim to envy , what
is there to say about ordinary mortals?CHAPTER C: UTANGA
WHEN the battle was over, Krishna bade farewell to the Pandavas and went
to Dwar aka. While on his way, he met his old brahmana friend Utanga.
Krishna stopped  and descending from his chariot saluted the brahmana.
Utanga returned  the greeting and proceeded to make the usual enquiries
about the health and welfare of relatives.
“Madhava, do your cousins the Pandavas and the Kauravas love one
another as brothers should? Are they well and flourishing?” he asked.
The innocent recluse had not heard about the great battle that had been
fought. Krishna was astounded at the question of his brahmana friend. For a
while, he stood silent not know ing what to say in reply . Then he softly
disclosed what had happened.
“Sir, a terrible battle had been fought by the Pandavas and the Kauravas. I
tried hard and applied every means to prevent the fight and make peace
between them. But they would not listen. Almost all of them have perished
on the field of battle. Who can stop the hand of fate?” Then he related all
that had happened.
When Utanga heard the narrative, he was exceedingly wroth. With eyes red
with indignation he spoke to Madhava:
“Vasudeva, were  you there stand ing by and did you let all this happen? You
have indeed failed in your duty. You have surely practised deceit and led
them to destruction. Prepare now to receive my curse!”
Vasudeva smiled and said: “Peace, peace! Calm yourself. Do not use up the
fruit of your great penances in this anger . Listen to what I say and then if
you like, you may pronounce your curse. ”
Krishna pacified  the indignant brahmana and appeared to him in his all-
embracing form, the V iswarupa.
“I am both in various bodies from time to time to save the world and
establish the good in whatever body I am born, I must act in conformity
with the nature of that body . When I am born as a deva, I act as a deva does.
If I appe ar as a yaksha or as a rakshasa, I do everything like a yaksha or arakshasa. If I am born as a human being, or as a beast, I do what is natural
to that birth and complete my task. I begged hard of the ignoran t Kauravas.
They were arrogant and intoxicated by power and paid no heed to my
advice. I tried to intimidate them . Therein also I failed. I was in wrath and
showed them even my Viswarupa. Even that failed to have effect. They
persisted in wrong-doing. They  waged war and perished. O best among
brahmanas, you have no reason to be angry with me.”
After this explanation of Krishna, Utanga recovered his calm. Krishna was
delighted.
“I wish to give a boon to you. What would you like?” said Krishna.
“Achchyuta,” said Utanga. “is it not enough I have seen Thee and Thy
Form Universal? I do not desire any further on.”
But Krishna insisted and the desert wandering simple brahmana said: “W ell,
my Lord, if you must give me some boon, let me find water to drink
whenever I might feel thirsty . Give me this boon.”
Krishna smiled. “Is this all? Have it then,” he said, and proceeded on his
journey .
One day Utanga  was very thirsty and, unable to find water anywhere in the
desert, he bethought himself of the boon he had received. As soon as he did
this, a nishada appeared before  him, clothed in filthy rags; he had five
hunting hounds  in leash and a water -skin strapped to his shoulder . The
nishada grinned  at Utanga and saying, “You seem to be thirsty . Here is
water for you,” offered the bamboo spout of his water -skin to the brahmana
to drink from.
Utanga, looking  at the man and his dogs and his water -skin, said in disgust:
“Friend, I do not need it, thank you.”
Saying this, he thought of Krishna and reproached him in his mind:
“Indeed, was this all the boon you gave me?"
The outcaste nishada pressed Utanga over and over again to quench his
thirst, but it only made Utanga more and more angry and he refused to
drink. The hunter and his dogs disappeared.Seeing the strange disappearance of the nishada, Utanga reflected: “Who
was this? He could not have been a real nishada. It was certainly a test and I
have blundered miserably . My philosophy deserted me. I rejected the water
offered by the nishada and proved myself to be an arrogant fool.”
Utanga was in great anguish. A moment later Madhava himself appeared
with conch and discus.
“O Purushottam a!" exclaimed Utanga, “you put me to a difficult trial. Was
it right of you to try me thus-make an untouchable offer unclean water to
me, a brahmana , to drink? Was this kind?” asked Utanga. Utan ga spoke in
bitter tones.
Janardana smiled. “O Utanga, for your sake, when you put my boon into
action, I asked Indra to take amrita to you and give it to you as water . He
said he could not give to a mort al what would give him immortality , while
he was willing to do anything else. But I prevailed upon him and he agreed
to take amrita and give it to you as water , provided I let him do it as a
chandala and tested your unders tanding and found you willing to take water
from a chandala. I accepted the challenge believing you had attained jnana
and transcended  externals. But you have done this and made me suffer
defeat at Indra’ s hands.” Utanga saw his mistake and was ashamed.CHAPTER CI: POUND OF FLOUR
WHEN Yudhis hthira was crowned and installed as king after the
Kurukshetra battle, he performed an aswamedha yajna. As was the custom
on occasions of this great horse sacrifice, all the princes of the land
gathered on invitation and the yajna was completed in great splendour . The
brahmanas and the poor and the destitute people, who had come in great
numbers from all parts of the country , received bounteous gifts.  Everything
was done in magnificent style and in conformity with the injunctions
relating to the sacrifice.
From somewher e unseen, a weasel suddenly appeared right in the middle of
the assembled guests and priest s in the great pavilion and, after rolling on
the ground, laughed a loud human laugh as if in derision. The priests were
alarmed at this range and unna tural occurrence and wondered whether it
was some evil spirit that had come to pollute and disturb the sacred rites.
The weasel’s body was on one side all shining gold. This remarkable
creature turned round and took a good view of the assembly of princes and
learned brahmanas that had come from various countries and gathered in
that great pavilion and began to speak:
“Princes assembled and priests, listen to me. You no doubt believe that you
have completed your yajna in splendid style. Once upon a time, a poor
brahmana who lived in Kuruksh etra, made a gift of a pound of maize flour .
Your great horse sacrifice and all the gifts made in that connection are less
than that small gift of the Kuru kshetra brahmana. You seem to think too
much of your yajna. Pray , be not so vain about it.”
The gathering was amazed at this strange and impertinent speech of the
golden weasel. The brahmana priests, who had performed the sacrificial
rites, went up to the weasel and spoke to it:
“Wherefrom and why have you come to this yajna, performed by good and
worthy men? Who are you? Why do you utter words of scorn about our
sacrifice? This aswamedha has been duly completed in every detail in
accordance with sastraic injunc tions. It is not meet that you should speak
derisively of our great sacrifice . Everyone that has come to this yajna; hasbeen duly attended to and has been accorded suitable honour s and gifts.
Everyone is pleased with the gifts and returns happy and contented. The
mantras have been chanted perfectly and the oblations duly offered. The
four castes are pleased. Why do you speak as you do? Do explain yourself.”
The weasel laughed again and said:
“O brahmanas, what I said is true. I do not grudge the good fortune of king
Yudhishthira or the good fortune of any of you. It is not envy that makes me
say this. The yajna, which you have just completed so showi ly, is not in
truth as great an act as that gift of the poor brahmana which I have seen.
And in reward for his gift, he and his wife, son and daughter -in-law were
immediately taken to swarga. Listen to my story which is a true narrative of
what I saw myself.
“Long before you waged your battle there, a hrahmana lived in
Kurukshetra, who obtained his daily food by gleaning in the fields. He and
his wife, son and daughter -in-law , all four lived in this manner . Every day in
the afternoon they would sit down and have their only meal for the day. On
days when they failed to find enough grain, they would fast until the next
afternoon. They would not keep over any thing for the next day if they got
more than they required for the day. This was the strict unchhavritti
discipline they had pledged themselves to observe.
“They passed their days thus for many years, when a great drought came
and there was famine all over the land. All cultivation ceased and there was
neither sowing nor harvesting nor any grain scattered in the fields to be
gleaned. For many days the brahmana and his family starved. One day, after
wandering in hunger and heat, with great difficulty they came home with a
small quantity of maize which they had gathered. They ground it and after
saying their prayers they divided the flour into four equal parts and offering
thanks to God, sat down eagerl y to eat. Just then, a brahmana entered and
he was exceedin gly hungry . Seeing an unexpected guest arrive, they got up
and made due obeisance and asked him to join them. The pure-souled
brahmana and his wife and son and daughter -in-law were exceedingly
delighted to have the good fortune of receiving guest at that juncture. Oh
best of brahmanas, I am a poor man. This flour of maize was obtained in
accordance with dharma. Pray accept this. May blessings attend on you,’said the brahmana of Kurukesh etra and gave his share of the flour to the
guest. The guest ate it with avidity but he was still hungry when he had
finished.
“Seeing his hungry and unsatisfied look, the brahmnna was grieved and did
not know what to do, when his wife said: ‘Lord, give my share also to him.
I shall be glad if the guest’ s hunger be satisfied.’ Saying this, she handed
her share of the flour to her husband to be given to the guest.
‘Faithful one,’ said the brahma na, ‘the beasts and the birds and all the
animals tend the females of their species with care. May man do worse? I
cannot accept your suggestion. What shall I gain in this or in the other
world if I leave you to starve and suffer hunger , you who help me and serve
me to do the sacred duties of a householder ’s life? Beloved one, you are
now skin and bone and famished and exceedingly hungry . How can I leave
you to suffer in that condition and hope to attain any good by feeding the
guest? No, I cannot accept your of fer.’
‘You are versed in the sastras, best of brahmanas’, replied the wife. ‘Is it not
true that dharma, artha and all the objects of human activity  are to the
common and equal benefit of both of us who have been joined together? Do
look on me with compassion and take my share of the flour and satisfy the
requirements of this our guest. You are hungry as I am and you should not
make any distinction between us. I entreat you not to deny my request.’
“The bramana yielded and took the wife’ s share and gave it to the guest
who took it greedily and ate it. But he was still hungry! Great was the
distress of the poor brahmana of Kurukshetra. His son, who saw this, came
forward. ‘Father , here is my share,’ said he. ‘Give it to this guest who seems
to be still hungry . I shall be indeed happy if we shall thus be able to fulfil
our duty .’
“The father’s distress increased.  ‘Child!’ he exclaimed, ‘old men can stand
starvation. Youth’s hunger is severe. I am not able to find it in my heart to
accept what you say .’
“The son insisted: ‘It is the duty of the son to look after his father in his
declining years.  The son is not different from the father . Is it not said thatthe father is born afresh in his son? My share of the flour is yours in truth. I
beg of you to accept what I give and feed this hungry guest.’
‘Dear boy, your nobility and your mastery over the senses fill me with
pride. Blessing on you; I shall accept your share!’ said the father , and he
took the sons flour and gave it to the guest to eat. The guest ate the third
part of the flour also but he was still hungry! The brahmana, who lived on
scattered grain, was confused .
“While he was in distress, not knowing what to do, his daug hter-in-law
addressed him thus:
‘Lord, I shall give my share too and gladly complete our efforts to feed this
guest. I beg of you to accept it and bless me, your child, for, by that, I shall
have eternal good as my reward.’
“The father-in-law was sad beyond measure. ‘O girl of spotless character ,
pale and emaciated as you are front starvation, you propose to give your
part of the food also to me so that I may earn merit by giving it to this guest.
If I accept your offer, I shall indeed be guilty of cruelty . How could I
possibly look on when you wither in hunger?”
“The girl would not listen. ‘Father , you are lord of my lord and master ,
preceptor of my preceptor , god of my god. I implore you to accept my flour .
Is not this body  of mine dedicated wholly to serve my lord? You should
help me to attain the good. Do take this flour , I entreat you.’
“Thus implored by his daughter -in-law , the brahmana accepted her share of
the flour and blessed her saying. ‘Loyal girl, may every good be yours!’
“The guest received this last portion avidly and ate it and was satisfied.
“Blessed is your hospitality , given with the purest intent and to the
uttermost of your capacity . Your gift has pleased me. Lo there! the gods are
showering flowers in admiration of your extraordinary sacrific e. See! the
gods and the gandharvas have come down in their bright chariots with their
attendants to take you with your family to the happy regions above. Your
gift has achieved swarga for you as well as for your ancestors. Hunger
destroys the understanding of men. It makes them go aside from the path of
rectitude. It leads them to evil thoughts. The pious, when suffering thepangs of hunger , lose their stead fastness. But you have even when hungry ,
bravely set aside your attachment to wife and son and placed dharma above
all else. Rajasuya sacrifices and horse sacrifices completed in splendour ,
would pale into insignificance before the great sacrifice you have done
through this single act of hospitality . The chariot is waiting for you. Enter
and go to swarga, you and your family .’ Saying this the myst erious guest
disappeared.”
Having related this story of the Kurukshetra brahmana who lived by
gleaning scattered ears of corn in the field, the weasel continued:
“I was nearby and caught the fragrance wafted from that flour of the
brahmana. It made my head all gold. I then went and rolled in joy on the
ground where some of the flour had been scattered. It made one side of me
into bright gold. I turned on the other side but there was no more flour left
and that part of me is still as it was. Desirous of getting my body made all
gold, I have been trying every place where men perform great yajnas and
penances. I heard that Yudhishthira of world fame was perform ing a yajna
and came here, believing that this sacrifice might come up to the standard.
But I found it did not. So, I said that your great aswamedha was not so great
as the gift of flour which that brahmana made to his guest.” The weasel then
disappeared.CHAPTER CII: YUDHISHTHIRA RULES
MAN pursues madly the object of his desire until it is got. When it is in his
possession, he is soon sated, but he becomes the slave of ever fresh
longings and fresh griefs and finds no peace.
Although to fight and to kill his enemies is a kshatriya’ s dharm a, what joy
can one get out of power and position and wealth acquired by slaughter and
grief inflicted on brothers and near relations? It was this that Arjuna pointed
out in his powerful plea before Krishna when the battle commenced.
Krishna in answer , explained the principles of man’ s activit ies and the
proper dischar ge of one’s duties. But, what Arjuna felt and argued had also
a great deal of force and there was more truth in it than appeared on the
surface.
The Pandavas defeated the Kauravas and became the unquestioned
sovereigns of the land. They took up their duties and disch arged them
according to dharma. But, they found not in victory , the joy which they had
expected.
“When the Pandavas won and obtained the kingdom, how did they treat
Dhritarashtra?” asked king Janamejaya, and Vaisampayana, who recited
Vyasa’ s Mahabharata to the king, tells the story .
Dhritarashtra, who was plunged in a sea of grief, was treated by the
Pandavas with the utmost respect. They tried to make him happy . They did
nothing to make him feel humil iated. Yudhishthira issued no orders except
with his approval. Gandhari, whose hundred sons had disappeared like
dream-gold, was looked after by Kuntidevi with loving and sisterly
devotion and Draupadi dutifully ministered to them both, with equal
respect. Yudhishthira furnished Dhritarashtra’ s house with rich seats and
beds and decorations and all else that was wanted. He sent from the royal
kitchen most dainty and palata ble dishes prepared for him. Kripacharya
lived with Dhritarashtra and kept him company . Vyasa comforted him with
instructive stories of olden times, calculated to assuage his sorrow. In the
administration of affairs of the State, Yudhishthira consulted Dhritarashtra
and conducted himself so as to give him the feeling that in truth thekingdom was ruled on his beha lf and that he, as the eldest member of the
family , was still the supreme authority . Yudhishthira was most careful in his
speech, never to allow himself to say anything to cause pain to the bereaved
old man. The princes, who came to Hastinapura from all parts of the world,
gave Dhritarashtra the same honours as they did of old, as if he were still
the emperor . The women attendants gave Gandhari no occasion to feel her
fallen estate. Yudhishthira had instructed his brothers most strictly that
nothing should be done to cause the slightest pain to their uncle who had
lost all his sons. The brothers, with perhaps the exception of Bhima,
followed this injunction faithfully . Dhritarashtra too conducted himself
lovingly towards  the Pandavas. He showed no ill-will towards them even as
he was shown no unkindness by them.
The Pandavas behaved unexceptionably towards their old uncle. After a
time, however , Bhima began on occasions to give cause for offence. He
would sometimes, in impatience, countermand the old man’ s instructions.
He would let fall in Dhritarash tra’s hearing words like “Those perverse
cousins of ours have themselves to thank for their destruction.” It was not
possible for Bhima to forget or forgive Duryodhana, Karna or Duhsasana.
Gandhari felt intensely grieved when she noticed that Bhima uttered words
which pained Dhritarashtra. She was, however , a noble and enlightened
soul. Whenever she felt pained at what Bhima said, she would look at Kunti
and find peace. For Kunti was a veritable embodiment of dharma and
inspired forbearance. Fifteen years passed in this manner .CHAPTER CIII: DHRITARASHTRA
FIFTEEN years passed under king Yudhishthira’ s reign, when old
Dhritarashtra found himself utterly unable any longer to bear the burden of
grief. Hurt by Bhima’ s occasional reproaches, he found no heart to accept
the courtesies and comforts provided under king Yudhishthira’ s orders.
Unknown to the Pandavas, he secretly fasted and underwent hard penances.
Gandhari too observed many fasts and inflicted privation on herself. And
one day Dhritarashtra sent for Dharmaputra and spoke to him thus:
“Son, blessings on you. I have spent fifteen happy years unde r your roof.
You have tended me most lovingly . I have made gifts and offerings to
ancestors and fulfilled all my desires in that respect. Bereaved Gandhari,
laying aside her own grief, has ministered to my physical wants all these
years. My cruel sons, who comm itted unfor givable wrong to Draupadi and
deprived you of your lawful inheritance, perished on account of their sins.
But they fought like brave soldie rs and died in the battlefield and have gone
to the happy regions reserved for the brave. The time has come when with
Gandhari I must do what has to be done for our next state. You know what
the sastras have laid down. I must now go to the forest. These robes must be
replaced by bark and tattered old clothes, suitable for the life of
Vanaprasthas. I desire to go and live in the forest, praying for your good. I
want your permission for this. Let me follow the practice of our fathers. As
king, you will share in the fruits of my penance.”
Yudhishthira received a shock when he saw Dhritarashtra and heard him say
this. “I did not know ,” he said, “that you had been fasting and sleeping on
the bare ground and mortifying your flesh in this manner . My brothers too
were unaware of this. I was misled into believing you were well looked
after and happy . Father , you have suffered grief, for which there can be no
solace. I see no good in kingdom or pleasures. I am a sinner . Desire and
ambition deceiv ed me into this. Let your son Yuyutsu be king, or any one
else you choose. Or if you will do so, you yourself may take up the duties
of king and look after the peopl e. I shall go to the forest. Let me terminate
this chapter of error . I implore you to save me from further obloquy and
burning shame. I am not the king. You are the king. You ask me forpermission to go. How then can I give or refuse permission to you? Let me
assure you that my anger again st Duryodhana is a thing of the past, gone
without a trace. Fate willed it and engulfed us all in confusion of mind, and
events happened which were not in our control. We are your children, even
like Duryodhana  and his brothe rs. Gandhari and Kunti are alike mother to
me and command equal regard and filial affection from me, their child. If
you go away to the forest, I must go with you and serve you there. If you
retire to the woods and leave me here, what joy shall I have in kingship? I
prostrate myself  before you and implore you to forgive the errors we have
been guilty of. Serving you will give me true joy and peace of mind. Give
me that opportunity and privilege. Do not desert me.”
Dhritarashtra was deeply moved. But he said: “Kunti’ s beloved son, my
mind is fixed on going to the forest and on penance. I can find no peace
otherwise now. I have lived under your roof for many years. You and all
your people have served me with unstinted devotion. You must permit me
now to fulfil my wish and let me go.”
Having thus spoken to Yudhishthira, who stood with clasped hands and
trembling with agitation, Dhritarashtra turned to V idura and Kripacharya.
“I beg of you to comfort the king and make him grant my prayer . My mind
is fixed on the forest. I am unabl e to speak any more. I am feeling dry in my
throat. Perhaps, it is due to age. I have talked too much. I am tired." Saying
this, he leaned helplessly on Gandhari and swooned.
Yudhishthira was unable to bear this distress of the grand old man, who had
possessed the sinews of an elephant and had had strength enough to crush
the metal figure of Bhima into powder . How lean he had becom e now and
emaciated, with his bones showing through his skin, piteously leaning
senseless on Gandhari like one destitute?
“Have I caused all this?” he reproached himself. “Miserable and unworthy
am I, ignorant of dharma, devoid of intelligence. A curse on my learning!”
He sprin kled water on Dhritarashtra’ s face and caressingly stroked him with
his soft hands. When the old man recovered, he tenderly clasped the
Pandava to his bosom and muttered: “My dear boy, how sweet is your
touch! I am happy .”Then Vyasa entered. When he was acquainted with what had happened, he
said to Yudhishthira: “Do what Dhritarashtra, eldest of the Kurus, desires.
Let him go to the forest. He is old. All his sons have gone before him. It is
not possible for him much longer to hear his grief. Gandhari, whom God
has blessed with enlightenment, has borne her sorrows with courage. Do not
stand in the way of their wishe s. Let not Dhritarashtra pine away and die
here. Let him go and live amon g the honeyladen flowers of the forest and
breathe their fragrance, leaving the cares of the world behind. The dharma
of kings is to die in battle or to spend their last days in retirement in the
forest. Dhritarashtra has ruled the kingdom and performed yajnas. When
you were in the wilderness for thirteen years, he enjoyed the wide earth
through his son and gave bounteous gifts. You left him nothing to desire.
The time has come for him to do penance. Let him go with your hearty
consent, and without anger in his heart.”
Dharmaraja said: “So be it!”
Then V yasa returned to his hermitage.CHAPTER CIV: THE PASSING AWAY OF THE
THREE
WHEN Yudhishthira at last gave his consent for Dhritarashtra’ s retirement
to the forest, Dhritarashtra and Gandhari went back to their residence and
broke their fast. Kunti sat with Gandhari and they ate together . Dhritarashtra
asked Yudhishth ira to sit by him and gave him his last blessings. Then the
old man stepped out and, with his hand resting on Gandhari’ s shoulder ,
slowly walked out of the city on his journey to the forest. Gandhari, who,
because her lord and husband was blind, gave up the use of her eyes and
wrapped her face with a napkin all her life, placed her hand on Kunti’ s
shoulder and slowly walked along, thus guided.
Kunti had decided in her mind  to go with Gandhari to the forest. As she
walked on, she was speaking to Yudhishthira: “Son, do not ever let your
speech be angry when you speak to Sahadeva. Remember with love Karna
who died a hero’ s death on the battlefield. He was my son, but I committed
the crime of not disclosing it to you. Look after Draupadi with unfailing
tenderness. Do not ever give cause for grief to Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and
Sahadeva. Keep  this ever in mind, son: the burden of the family is now
wholly on you.”
Dharmaputra had till then believed that Kunti was accompanying Gandhari
only for a distance to say good-bye to her . When he heard her speak thus, he
was taken aback and was speechless for a few minutes. When he recovered
from the shock he said: “Mothe r, not thus! You blessed us and sent us to
battle. It is not right you should now desert us and go to the forest.”
Yudhishthira’ s entreaties were however of no avail. Kunti held to her
purpose. “I must join my lord and husband wherever he be now. I shall be
with Gandhari and go through the discipline of forest life and soon join
your father . Go back unagitated. Return to the city. May your mind ever
stand steady on dharma.” Thus did Kunti bless her illustrious-son and
depart.
Yudhishthira stood speechless. Kunti went on her way, looking back
occasionally at him and her other sons. Each with hand on the shoulder ofthe other , this picture of the three elders of the tribe wending their way to
the forest, leaving their sons behind, is painted by the poet so vividly that it
fills the reader with solemn grief, as if the parting happened in his own
family now .
Dhritarashtra, Gandhari and Kunti spent three years in the forest. Sanjaya
was with them. When one day, Dhritarashtra finished his ablutions and
returned to their hermitage, the forest had caught fire. The wind blew and
the flames sprea d everywhere. The deer and the wild boars ran in herds
hither and thither , and rushed  madly to the pools. Dhrita rashtra told
Sanjaya: “This fire will envelop us all. You had better save yourself."
Saying this, the blind old king, Gandhari with her eyes blindfolded and
Kunti sat down on the ground, the three of them, facing eastwa rds in yoga
posture and calmly gave themselves up to the flames.
Sanjaya, who had been to the blind king, throughout all his days, his only
light and was clear to him like life itself, spent the rest of his days in the
Himalayas as a sanyasin.CHAPTER CV: KRISHNA PASSES AWAY
KRISHNA ruled at Dwaraka for thirty-six years after the Kurukshetra battle
was over. The Vrishnis, the Bhopas and other branches of the Yadavas
belonging to Krishna’ s tribe spent their days in unrestrained self-
indulgence and luxury . They lost all sense of discipline and humility .
Once, some rishis came to Dwa raka. The arrogant and irreverent Yadavas
mocked these rishis with a practical joke. They dressed up one of their
young men like a woman and, present ing him to the revered guests, said:
“O ye learned men, tell us whether this lady will have a boy or a girl.”
The rishis saw through the irreverent joke and said in anger: “This person
will give birth to a mace, not a boy or a girl and that mace will prove to be
Yama to your tribe and destroy you all.” The rishis departed after
pronouncing this curse.
The foolish Yadavas were rather perturbed at this unpleasant ending of what
they had thought was a good joke. Next day, they were in consternation to
see that Samba, the man who had been dressed up in female clothes,
developed labou r pains and lo and behold, gave birth to a mace! This filled
them with terror because they felt that their end was near as the rishis had
cursed.
They deliberated  long and finally ground the mace to fine powder which
they scattered in the sea, and thought they had thus disposed of the danger .
Nothing happened for some time. Seasons passed. The rains came and on
the beach, near where they had strewn the fine dust of the awfu l club, there
sprang up a dense, crop of rushes. When the Yadavas saw this, they were
curious and amused, for they had for gotten all about the curse of the revered
guests .
One day , long after , the Y adavas went to the beach for a picnic and spent the
whole day in dance and drink and revelry . The liquor began to work. At
first merry , then pugnacious, they began to talk without restrain , raking up
old of fences and quarrelling on slight cause with one another .
Among the Y adavas, Kritavarma had fought on the side of the Kauravas and
Satyaki on that of the Pandavas.“Would any kshatriya attack and kill sleeping soldiers, O Kritavarma? You
have brought a great and lasting disgrace on our tribe,” said Satyaki,
taunting Kritavarma; and a number of drunken Yadavas acclaimed the
attack. Kritavarma could not bear the insult.
“Like a butcher , you slaughtered the great Bhurisravas when seated in yoga
after his right hand was cut off and you, coward, dare to taunt me,” he
exclaimed and a number of the revellers joined him and began  to scoff at
Satyaki for his barbarous deed.
Soon, all the Yadavas were in the quarrel on one side or the other and
presently from words they came to blows, which swiftly deve loped into a
free fight. Satyaki, with his sword drawn, sprang upon Kritavarma and
swept his head off, exclaiming: “Here is the end of the coward  who killed
sleeping soldiers!”
Others immediately fell upon Satyaki with their drinking bowls and pots
and anything they could lay hands upon.
Pradyumna, Krishna’ s son, joined the fray to rescue Satyaki and there was a
desperate melee  in which both Satyaki and Pradyumna were killed. Krishna
knew that the destined hour was come, and plucking the tall rushes which
fringed the beach laid about him with them indiscriminately . This led to
everyone of the Yadavas doing the same and there was great indiscriminate
slaughter . The rishis’ curse had begun to work .
The rushes that had grown out of the mace became each one of them a mace
as it was plucked by the doomed men in their insensate fury. They used
them on one another with deadly effect and soon all of them were destroyed
in this drunken brawl.
Balarama, who was seeing all this, was overwhelmed with shame and
disgust and sank to the ground. He gave up his life as he lay in a yoga
trance and passed away into the ocean in a stream of light which issued
from his forehead like a silver serpent. Thus ended the avatar of Narayana
in Balarama.
Krishna saw all his people thus destroy themselves as predestine d. When he
saw the passing  of Balarama, he roamed about in deep medit ation in thewilderness, pondering on the completion of his avatar . “The time has come
for me to go, ’ he said to himself and, lying on the ground, fell asleep.
In that wooded beach, a hunter , prowling for game, saw Vasudev lying on
the ground among the shrubs and, from a distance, mistook him for a wild
animal resting on the ground. He bent his bow and shot an arrow at the
prostrate figure which, piercing his foot in the instep, went full through his
body . Thus did the great V asudeva depart from the world of men.CHAPTER CVI: YUDHISHTHIRA’S FINAL
TRIAL
To Hastinapura came the sad tidings of the death of Vasudeva and the
destruction of the Yadavas. Whe n the Pandavas received the news, they lost
all rema ining attachment to life on earth. They crowned Parikshit, son of
Abhimanyu, as emperor and the five brothers left the city with Draupadi.
They went out on a pilgrimage, visiting holy places and finally reached the
Himalayas. A dog joined them somewhere and kept them company all
along, and the seven of them climbed the mountain on their last pilgrimage.
As they toiled up the mountain path one by one fell exhausted and died. The
youngest succumbed first. Draupadi, Sahadeva and Nakula were released
from the burden  of the flesh one after another . Then followed Arjuna and
then great Bhima too. Yudhishthira saw these dear ones fall and die. Yet,
serenely he went on not giving way to grief, for the light of Truth burned
bright before him and he knew what was shadow and what was substance.
The dog still followed Yudhishthira. The lesson enforced by the poet in this
episode of the dog is that dharma is the only constant companion in life’s
journey . It was dharma who, in the shape of the dog, followed Yudhishthira
up the wearisom e mountam path, when his brothers and wife had gone
leaving him alone.
Finally , when he reached a great height, Indra appeared.in his chariot.
“Your brothers and Draupadi have arrived before you. You have lagged
behind, burdene d with your body. Ascend my chariot and go with me in the
flesh. I have come to take you,” said Indra. But when Yudhishth ira went up
to take his seat in Indra’ s chariot, the dog also climbed up.
“No, no.” said Indra. “There is no place for dogs in swarga,” and pushed the
dog away .
“Then there is no room for me either ,” said Yudhishthira, and refused to
enter the heavenly chariot if he had to leave his faithful companion behind. 
Dharma had come to test Yudhishthira’ s loyalty and he was pleased with his
son's conduct. The dog vanished from sight.  Yudhishthira reached swarga.
There, he saw Duryodhana. The Kuru prince was seated on a beautifulthrone and he shone with the splendour of the sun and around him stood in
attendance the goddess of heroism and other angels. He did not see his
brothers or anyone else.
Yudhishthira was astonished.
“Where are my brothers, ye denizens of swar ga?” asked Y udhishthrra. “This
man of greed, of limited vision, is here. I do not care to spend my time in
his company . We were driven by this man’ s envy and spite to kill friends
and relatives. We stood tied by dharma to inaction when, before our eyes,
innocent Panchali, united to us in sacred wedlock, was dragged to the Hall
of the Assembly and insulted under the orders of this wicked man. I cannot
bear the sight of this man. Tell me, where are my brothers? I wish to go
where they are.” Saying this Yudhishthira averted his eyes from where
Duryodhana was seated in glory .
Then Narada, the heavenly rishi of encyclopaedic knowledge, smiled
disapprovingly at Y udhishthira and said: 
“Renowned prince, this is not right. In swarga, we harbour no ill-will. Do
not speak in this manner about  Duryodhana. The brave Duryodharra has
attained his present state by force of kshatriya dharma. It is not right to let
the things of the flesh stay in the mind and breed ill-will. Do follow the law
and stay here with king Duryodhana. There is no place in swarga for hatred.
You have arrived here with your human body; so it is that you have these
inappropriate feelings. Discard them, son!”
Yudhishthira replied:
“O sage, Duryodhana, who did not know right from wrong, who was a
sinner , who caused suffering to good men, who fed enmity and anger and
who brought death to countless men, has attained this swarga of warriors.
Where is that region of greater glory, which must be the abode of my brave
and good brothers and Draupad i? I am eager to see them and Karna, and
also all the friends and princes who gave up their lives in battle for me; I do
not see them here. I desire to meet again Virata, Drupada, Dhrishtaketu and
Sikhandin, the Panchala prince. I long to see the dear sons of Draupadi and
Abhimanyu, I do not see them here. Where are they, who threw their bodies
into the blazing fire of battle for my sake, like ghee in the sacrifice? I do notsee any of them here. Where are they all? My place must be among them.
At the close of the battle, my mother Kunti wanted me to offer libations for
Karna also. When I think of it, even now, grief overwhelms me. In
ignorance of his being my own blood-brother , I caused Karna to be slain. I
am eager to see him, Bhima, dearer to me than life, Arjuna, who was like
Indra himself, the twins Nakula and Sahadeva and our dear Panchali,
steadfast in dharma. I long to see and be with them all. I do not wish to be
in heaven, for what good is it for me to be here, away from my brothers?
Wherever they may be, that to me is swar ga; not this place!”
The angels, who heard this, replied:
“O Yudhishthira, if you indeed desire to be with them, by all means, you
may go at once. There is no need to delay ,” and they ordered an attendant to
take Y udhishthira.
So, the messeng er proceeded in front and Yudhishthira followed him. As
they went along, it soon became dark and in the gathering gloom could be
dimly seen things weird and revolting. He waded through slippery slime of
blood and offal. The path was strewn with carrion and bones and dead
men’ s hair. Worms were wriggling everywhere and there was an
insuf ferable stench in the air . He saw mutilated human bodies everywhere.
Yudhishthira was horrified and confused. A thousand thoughts tortured his
mind as he proceeded.
“How far have we to go yet on this road? Where indeed are my brothers?
Tell me, my friend,” he enquired of the messenger in deep anguish.
The messenger quietly replied: “if you so desire, we may turn back.”
The foul odours of the place were so sickening that for a moment
Yudhishthira was minded to go back. But just then, as if divining his
intentions, vaguely familiar voices rose all around in loud lamentation.
“O Dharmaputra, do not go back ! Stay here for a few minutes at least. Your
presence has given us momentary relief from torture. As you came, you
have brought with you a whiff of air so sweet and pure that we have found a
little relief in our agony . Son of Kunti, the very sight of you gives us
comfort and mitigates our suf fering. O stay be it for ever so short a time. Donot go back. While you are here, we enjoy a respite in our torture.” Thus the
voices pleaded.
Hearing the loud lamentation s that thus came from all around him,
Yudhishthira stood in painful bewilderment. Over -whelmed with pity at the
poignant anguish in faintly remembered voices, he exclaimed:
“Alas wretched souls! Who be ye that lament like this? Why are you here?”
“Lord, I am Karna,” said a voice.
“I am Bhima,” said another .
“I am Arjuna,” cried a third voice.
“Draupadi,” cried another voice in piteous tone.
“I am Nakula,”  “I am Sahadev a,” “We are Draupadi’ s sons,” and so on,
came dolorous voices from all around, till the accumulated pain was more
than Y udhishthira could bear .
“What sin indeed have these been guilty of?” cried he. “Dhritarashtra’ s son
Duryodhana, what good deeds did he do to sit like Mahendra  in heaven,
while these are in hell? Am I dreaming or am I awake? Is my mind
deranged? Have I gone crazy?”
Overwhelmed by anger , Yudhishthira cursed the gods and denounced
dharma. He turned to the ange l-attendant and said sharply: “Go back to
your masters. I shall stay here where my dear brothers, for no other sin than
devotion to me, are consigned to the tortures of hell. Let me be with them.”
The messenger went back and conveyed to Indra what Yudhishthira had
said.
Thus passed the thirteenth part of a day. Then Indra and Yama appeared
before Yudhisht hira where he stood in anguish. When they came, the
darkness rolled away and the horrid sights disappeared. The sinners and
their suffering: were no more to be seen. A fragrant breeze blew as Yama,
the god of dharma, smiled on his son Y udhishthira.
“Wisest of men, this is the third time I have tested you. You chose to remain
in hell for the sake of your brothers. It is inevitable that kings and rulers
must go through hell if only for a while. So it was that for the thirtieth partof a day you too were doome d to suffer the pangs of hell. Neither the
illustrious Savya sachi nor your beloved brother Bhima is really in hell. Nor
Karna, the just, not any one else who you thought had been consigned to
suffering. It was an illusion designed to test you. This is not hell-but
swarga. Do you not see there Narada whose peregrinations cover the three
worlds? Cease grieving.”
Thus said Yama to Dharmaput ra who, thereupon, was transfigured. The
mortal frame was gone and he was a god. With the disappearance of the
human body , also disappeare d all trace of anger and hatred. Then
Yudhishthira saw there Karna and all his brothers and the sons of
Dhritarashtra also, serene and free from anger , all having attained the state
of the gods. In this reunion, Yudhishthira at last found peace and real
happiness.GLOSSARY
Abhimanyu Son of Arjuna and Subhadra who was married to Uttara,
daughter of King V irata.
Acharya Teacher or Guru.
Achuta A synonym of Sri Krishna.
Adhiratha Karna’ s foster -father
Agastya A great sage whose life-story the Pandavas learnt
while on pilgrimage to holy places. His wife
Lopamudra was equally a great sage in her own right.
Agnihotra A sacrifice to God Agni .
Airavata Indra’ s elephant.
Ajatasatru Having no enemy: friend of all born things: an epithet
of Yudhishthira.
Akshayapatra A wonderful vessel given to Y udhishthira by the
Sun-god which held a never -failing supply of food.
Alambasa A raksasa friend of Duryodhana who had joined
his forces but Satyaki compelled him to flee from the
battlefield.
Amrit Ambrosia, the food of the gods. which makes the partaker
immortal.
Anga Mlechchha king, a Kaurava supporter .
Arani An upper and a lower piece of wood used for producing fire
by attrition.
Artha Wealth; one of the objects of human life: the others
being Dharma, (righteousness), Karna (satisfaction of
desires), Moksha (spiritual salvation).
Arundhati Wife of sage V asishtha.
Ashtavakra A towering scholar while still in his teens.Asita A sage who held that gambling was ruinous and
should be avoided by all wise people.
Asmaka A Kaurava warrior who attacked Abhimanyu.
Astra A missile char ged with power by a holy incantation.
Aswamedha Y ajna A horse sacrifice.
Aswathama Son of Dronacharya and last supreme commander
of the Kaurava forces.
Bahlika, Dasharna, Kalinga, 
Magadha, Matsya,
Panchala, Salva States the kings of which were friendly to the
Pandavas.
Baladev Balarama, elder brother of Sri Krishna.
Balarama Elder brother of Sri Krishna,
Balarama An avatar or incarnation of Adisesha the
thousand-hooded serpent on which Lord
Mahavishnu reclines in V aikuntha.
Bakasura A vorac ious, cruel and terribly strong
rakshasa or demon who lived in a cave near the
city of Ekachak rapura whom Bhima killed to
the great relief of the citizens.
Bhagadatta King of Pragjyotisha, a Kaurava ally .
Bhagawan Form of address to Gods and great
rishis: e.g. Bhagawan Sri Krishna, Narada,
Vyasa.
Bharata Son of Kaikeyi and King Dasaratha,
step-brother of Rama, who was exceptionally
devoted to and loved Rama.
Bharadwaja A rishi, father of Y avakrida.
Brahma Creator of the universe.Brahmastra A divine weapon, irresistible, one given by Lord
Brahma himself.
Brahmacharin A religious student, unmarried, who
lives with his spiritual guide, 
devoted to study and service.
Brahmacharya Celibacy , chastity; the stage of life of
Vedic study in which chastity and service are
essential.
Brihadaswa A great sage who visited the Pandavas
in their forest hermitage and reminded them of
King Nala of Nishadha who also lost his
kingdom in the game of dice and who deserted
his wife Damayanti because of a curse but
ultimately regained both.
Brihadratha Commander of three regiments, reigned
over Magadha and attained celebrity as a great
hero, married the twin daughters of the Raja of
Kasi. His two wives ate each half of a mango
given by sage Kausika and begot half a child
each. A rakshasi recovered the two portions
from a dustbin wherein they were thrown and
when they accidentally came together . They
became a chubby baby which she presented to
the king, saying it was his child, which later
became known as Jarasandha.
Brihadyumna A king, a disciple of sage Raibhya.
Brihannala Name assumed by Arjuna while living at V irata’ s
court in incognito.
Brihatbala A daring warrior who char ged at
Abhimanyu caught in the Kaurava army’ s net.
Bhima The second Pandava brother who
excelled in physical prowess as he was born ofthe wind-god.
Bhishmaka King of V idarbha, father of Rukmini and Rukma
Bhishma The old grandsi re to whose care were
committed the five Pandavas by the rishis
when the eldest  Yudhishthira attained the age
of 16 for their proper upbringing including
mastery of the Vedas, Vedanta and various arts
especially those  pertaining to the Kshatriyas.
Later he intervened but witho ut success to
bring about peace and understanding between
the Kauravas and the Pandav as who ruled
separately from Hastinapura and Indraprastha
respectively . He was the eighth child of King
Santanu and Ganga. Appointed supreme
commander of the Kaurava armies.
Bhojas A branch of the Y adava clan belonging to Krishna’ s
tribe.
Bhuminjaya Another name of prince Uttara son of
Virata who had proceeded to fight the Kaurava
armies, with Brihannala as his charioteer .
Bhurisravas One of the powerful kings on the side of the
Kauravas.
Bibhatsu One of Arjuna’ s name meaning a hater of unworthy
acts.
Chala A Kaurava warrior .
Chandala A person of a degraded caste, whose
conduct was much below standard and whose
contact was supposed to cause pollution.
Charachitra A son of King Dhritarashtra who perished in the
war.Chavadi Place of public assembly of the village.
It is the property of the entire community . In it
all public business is transacted and it serves
also as the village club, the head-quarters of the
village police and guest- house for travellers.
Chekitana Head of one division of the Pandava army .
Chitra A son of Dhritarashtra killed in the war .
Chitraksha One of the many sons of King Dhritarashtra who fell
in the war .
Chitrasena King of the gandharvas who prevented
the Kauravas from putting up their camp near
the pond where he himself had encamped.
Chitrayudha A Kaurava prince who laid down his life in the
war.
Chitravarma A brother of Duryodhana who was killed in the
war
Chitrangada Elder son of Santanu born of Matsya-
gandhi (Satyavati) who succeeded his father on
the throne of Hastinapura.
Chitrasena A Kaurava warrior .
Daruka Sri Krishna’ s charioteer .
Dasaratha King of A yodhya and Rama’ s father .
Darshana A country whose king attacked
Bhagadatta’ s elephant in an ef fort to save
Bhima.
Devadatta Name of Arjuna’ s conch.
Devaki Mother of Sri Krishna
Devala A sage who condemned the game of
dice as an evil form of gambling and declaredit unfit as entertainment for good people, as it
usually of fered scope for deceit and dishonesty .
Devavrata The eighth child  of Santanu and Ganga
who in time mastered the art of wielding arms
and learned the Vedas and Vedanta as also the
sciences know n to Sukra was crowned
Yuvaraja heir-apparent, but later vowed to
celibacy and was known as Bhishma.
Devayani The beautiful daughter of Sukracharaya
preceptor of the demons, who fell in love with
Kacha, son of Brihaspati, preceptor of the
Devas.
Devendra King of the Gods.
Dharma Righteous course of conduct.
Dharmagranthi Assumed named of Nakula at V irata’ s court.
Dharmananda The delighter of Dharma-a name of
Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma or Y ama.
Dharmavyadha He possessed the secret of good life and
lived in the city of Mithila; he was a meat-
seller .
Dhananjaya One of the names of Arjuna.
Dhanusaksha A great sage whom Medhavi, son of
sage Baladhi, once insulted. He took the form
of a bull and butted at that moun tain and broke
it to pieces; then Medhavi fell down dead.
Dhaumya Prceeptor of the Pandavas, who
accompanied them during their exile to the
Kurijangala forest, singing Sama hymns
addressed to Y ama, Lord of Death.
Dhristadhyumna Supreme commander of the Pandava forces,
eldest brother of Draupadi.Dhrishtaketu  A kinsman of the Pandavas.
Dhritarashtra Elder son of V ichitravirya and Ambika,
born blind, father of Duryodhana.
Dharmaputra The son of Y ama-epithet of Y udhishthira.
Dhartarashtras Sons of Dhritarashtra.
Draupadi Daughter of King Drupada, King of
Panchala who married all the five Pandavas
though Arjuna had won her in the
Swayamvara, because of the vow that they
would share everything in common.
Drona Son of a Brahm ana named Bharadwaj;
married a sister of Kripa and a son Aswathama
was born to them; learnt military art from
Parasurama, the master; later he became the
instructor of the Kaurava and Pandava princes
in the use of arms.
Drupada King of Panchala, father of Draupadi
who became the wife of the Pandavas.
Duhsasana Duryodhana’ s brother who dragged
Draupadi to the hall of assembly pulling her by
her hair .
Durdhara A son of Dhritarashtra killed by Bhima in the war .
Durjaya A brother of Duryodhana who was sent
to attack Bhima, to save Karna’ s life, but lost
his own.
Durmarsha A son of Dhritarashtra killed by Bhima.
Durmata A son of Dhritarashtra who got killed by Bhima.
Durmukha A chariot-borne warrior on the Kaurava side.
Durvasa A sage known for his anger who visited the Kauravas.
Durvishaha A warrior fighting on the Kaurava side.Dushkarma A warrior belonging to the Kaurava side.
Dussaha A son of Dhritarashtra killed by Bhima.
Dwaitavana A forest where the Kaurava cows were being bred
and killed.
Ganapati Amanuensis of V yasa who agreed to
write down without pause or hesitation the
story of the Mahabharata dictated by V yasa.
Gandhari Dhritarashtra’ s wife and queen-mother of the
Kauravas.
Gandharvas A class of celestial beings regarded as specialists in
music.
Gandiva Arjuna’ s most potent bow .
Gangadwara A place where sage Agastya and his wife performed
penance.
Ghatotkacha Son of Bhima from Hidimba.
Govinda One of the epithets of Sri Krishna and
Vishnu; it means 21 cow-keepe r and refers to
Krishna’ s occupation in Gokula, the colony of
cowherds.
Guru Revered preceptor , teacher .
Hamsa, Hidimbaka, Kamsa Allies of King Jarasandha; the
last married the two daughters of Jarasandha.
Also Krishna’ s step-uncle whom Krishna
killed.
Halayudha Plough-weaponed - an epithet of
Balarama who wielded a plough as his weapon.
Hanuman Wise and learned monkey devotee of
Sri Rama, who possessed extraordinary powers
of discriminati on and wisdom and whosearched and found Sita in her confinement in
Lanka.
Hastinapura Capital city of the Kauravas.
Hrishikesha Krishna.
Ilvala This demon and his brother Vatapi hated
brahmanas implacably . Ilvala would invite a
brahman to a feast at which he would serve the
meat of the goat into which his brother had
turned himself. After the brahmin had partaken
of the feast he would call his brother out who
would rend his way back to life, tearing the
belly of the guest.
Indra King of the Gods.
Indrajit Son of Ravana, King of Lanka, who
conquered Indra, the Lord of Gods and who
was killed by Rama’ s brother Lakshamana.
Indrasena A kinsman of the Pandavas.
Indrakila A mountain Arjuna passed on his way to
the Himalayas to practise auster ities to acquire
powerful new weapons from Lord Mahadeva.
Iravan Arjuna’ s son by a Naga wife who fell in the battle on
the eighth day .
Janaka King of Mithila, a great Rajarishi; father of Sita, wife
of Sri Rama.
Janamejaya A king who conducted a great sacrifice
for the well-being of the human race.
Janardana A name of Krishna.
Jarasandha Mighty king of Magadha of whose
prowess all kshatriyas were afraid. Killed by
Bhima in a thirteen day non-stop physicalcombat, with Sri Krishna and Arjuna as
witnesses.
Jarita, Laputa Female compani ons of a saranga  bird, who
was a rishi named Mandapala in his previous
birth when he was refused admi ssion to heaven
because he was childless.
Jatasura A demon killed by Bhima.
Jaya A son of King Dhritarashtra who was killed by Bhima in
the war .
Jayadratha A warrior on the side of Kauravas who
closed the breach effected by Abhimanyu in
the Chakravyuha military formation by
Dronacharya and trapped him inside.
Jayatsena A kinsman of the Pandavas.
Jayatsena A warrior fighting on the side of Kauravas.
Jnana Knowledge of the eternal and real.
Kacha Grandson of sage Angiras and son of
Brihaspati, who went to seek knowledge under
Sukracharya as a brahmacharin;  Devayani, the
preceptor ’s lovely daughter , fell in love with
him. The Asuras (demons) suspecting him of
wanting to steal the secret of reviving the dead,
killed him a number of times but due to
Devayani’ s love for him, her father brought
him back to life every time he was killed.
Ultimately the secret was learn t by the devas
who then succeeded in defeating the asuras.
Kagola A disciple of the great sage and teacher of V edanta,
Uddalaka.
Kambojas Enemies of the Kauravas whom Karna had defeated.Kamsa Maternal Uncle of Sri Krishna and son
of Ugrasena, also son-in-law of Jarasandha,
whom Sri Krishna killed.
Kanika Minister of Sakuni.
Kanka Assumed name of Y udhishthira at V irata’ s court.
Kausika A sage who learnt from Dharmavyadha
the secret of Dharma, of performing one’ s duty .
Karna A matchless warrior , son of the Sun-god
and Kunti. Disciple of Parasurama. Also son of
Radha, his foster -mother , and was known as
Radheya.
Kartavirya A great warrior who defeated Ravana, King of
Lanka.
Kartikeya Commander of the armies of the devas.
Kekaya A brave warrior on the Pandava side
into whose chariot Bhima got during the
fighting on the sixth day .
Kesava One of the names of Sri Krishna.
Ketama Another chief whose head was cut of f by Drona.
Khandavaprastha The ancient capital from where the
ancestors of Pandavas, Nahush a. and Yayati
ruled. The Pandavas rebuilt the ruined city and
erected palaces and forts and renamed it
Indraprastha.
Kichaka Sudeshna’ s brother , commander -in-chief
of Virata’s army, who made advances to
Sairandhri (Draupadi), was invited to meet her
at night at the ladies’ dancing hall and was met
instead by Valala (Bhima) dressed up as a
female who killed him (Kichaka).Kripacharya Aswathama’ s uncle who advocated a
combined assault on Arjuna in battle as against
Karna’ s boast that he could take him on single-
handed.
Krishna-Dwaipayana Sage V yasa.
Krauncha Curlew-heron. Krauncha-vyuha:
military formati on on a patter n supposed to
resemble a heron with outstret ched beak and
spreading wing s. In ancient Indian practice,
armies were arrayed for battle in formations of
definite patterns, each of which had a name-
such as Chakra, or Kurma, or Krauncha, or
Makara according to a real or fancied
resemblance.
Kritavarma A notable Y adava warrior fighting on the side
of Kaurava forces.
Kshatradharma A great warrior on the Pandavas.
Kuchasthala A city where Krishna stayed the night on
his way to the court of Dhritarashtra.
Kumbhakarna Brother of Ravana, King of Lanka,
who was asleep most of the time because of the
curse of Brahma.
Kundinapura  Capital of V idarba.
Kunti She was the daughter of Sura and was
known as Pritha. She was given in adoption to
the king’ s childless cousin Kuntibhoja and was
named Kunti after her adoptiv e father . Sage
Durvasa, whom she had served while he was a
guest at her father ’s house, gave her a divine
mantra which when repeated would give her a
son from any god whom she would call upon.
Out of childish curiosity , she invoked the Sun-god by repeating the Mantra and then she gave
birth to a son born with divine armour and ear-
rings; ashamed, she placed the child in a sealed
box and set it afloat on a river. The box was
picked up by a childless chariote er and brought
up as his own and became known as Karna.
Later , Kunti chose Pandu as her husband at a
Swayamvara.
Kunti-Madri Queens of King Pandu who gave birth to
three and two sons known as the Pandavas in
the forest where he spent many years for
having committ ed some sin. The sons were
known as Yudhishthira, Bhima. Arjuna, and
Nakula, Sahadeva.
Kurma Tortoise.
Lakshmana Younger step-brother of Rama and son
of Sumitra and King Dasaratha. Duryodhana’ s
gallant young son also bore this name.
Lomasa A brahmana sage who advised the
Pandavas to reduce their retinue while
repairing to the forest. Those unable to bear the
hardships of exile were free to go to the court
of Dhritarashtra  or Drupada, King of Panchala.
He accompanied Yudhishthira on his
wanderings.
Lopamudra Daughter of the king of V idarbha who married the
sage Agastya.
Lord Narayana Refuge of men; Mahavishnu.
Madhava One of the names of Krishna. It means the Lord of
Lakshmi.
Madhusudana Another name of Krishna, the slayer of the
asura Madhu.Mahavishnu Lord of the Universe who took human
birth in order to wrest his kingdom from
Emperor Bali for the salvation  of the world.
Lord Vishnu also took birth as Rama, son of
Dasaratha, to kill Ravana, King of Lanka.
Mahendra A King who had attained heaven.
Maitreya A sage who visited the court of
Dhritarashtra, expressed sorrow at the
Pandava’ s pligh t, advised Duryodhana not to
injure the Pandavas for his own good.
Mantra An incantation with words of power .
Manasarovar A sacred lake in the Himalayas.
Mandavya A sage wrongly  punished by the king
by being impaled as the chief of robbers who
had clandestinely hidden their stolen goods in a
corner of his hermitage when he was in deep
contemplation. Lord Dharma gave him this
punishment for having tortured birds and bees
in his childhood. At this Mandavya cursed
Dharma who was born as Vidura, the wise, to
the servant-maid of Ambalika, wife of King
Vichitravirya, who offered herself to Sage
Vyasa in place of Ambalika.
Maricha A character in the Ramayan; uncle of
Ravana who transformed himself into a golden
deer at the behest of Ravana to entice Sita.
Markandeya A sage who told Y udhishthira the story of a
brahmana, Kausika.
Marutta A king of the Ikshwaku dynas ty whose
sacrifice was performed by Samvarta in
defiance of Indra and Brihaspati.Matali Charioteer of Indra who took Arjuna to the kingdom
of gods.
Medhavi Son of Sage Baladhi who desired that
his son should live as long as a certain
mountain lasted.
Meru An ancient mountain. Becoming jealous
of Meru, the Vindya began to grow very high
obstructing the sun, the moon and the planets.
Agastya whom the Vindhya mountain
respected asked it to stop growing until he
crossed it on his way to the south and returned
to the north again. But he did not return at all,
having settled in the south!
Nahusha A might y king who was made king of
the gods because Indra had disappeared due to
his killing V ritra through sin and deceit.
Nakula Fourth brother of the Pandavas.
Nala King of Nishadha who lost his kingdom
in a game of dice and deserted his wife
Damayanti because of a curse.
Nandini Vasishtha’ s divinely beautiful cow .
Nara Arjuna or Dhananjaya.
Narada The sage who suddenly appeared before
Dhritarashtra and Vidura as the latter was
describing the departure of the Pandavas to the
forest and uttered a prophecy that after fourteen
years the Kauravas would be extinct as a result
of Duryodhana ’s crimes and vanished as
suddenly .
Narayana Sri Krishna or Krishna; V ishnu.
Narayanas Krishna’ s kinsmenNarayanasrama A charm ing forest where the Pandavas
had halted during their wanderings.
Nishadha A country where Indra, Lord of the gods
had lived once disguised as a brahmana.
Nishada An aboriginal hunter or fisherman; a
man of low or degraded tribe in general; an
outcaste.
Panchajanya Name of Krishna’ s conch.
Palasa Butea frondosa: “flame of the forest".
Panchali Another name of Draupadi, Queen of the
Pandavas and daughter of King Drupada
Panchalya A son of King Drupada who died in the war .
Pandu Second son of Vichitravirya and
Ambalika who succeeded to the throne of
Hastinapura on his father ’s death, as his elder
brother Dhritara shtra was born blind, father of
the Pandavas.
Parasara A great sage, father of V eda Vvasa.
Paravasu Son of Raibhva and elder brother of
Arvavasu whose wife was violated by
Yavakrida who was killed with a spear by a
fiend for his sin.
Parikshit Son of Abhimanyu and grandson of the
Pandavas who was crowned king after the
holocaust claimed the Kauravas and the
Pandavas.
Partha Arjuna
Parvati Consort of Siva. Rukmini prayed to her
for saving her from the cruel Sisupala king of
Chedi, as she had set her heart on marrying
Krishna.Paurava A Kaurava hero
Phalguna Arjuna
Prabhasa The V asu who seized V asishtha’ s divine cow .
Pradyumna Sri Krishna’ s son.
Pratikhami Duryodhana’ s charioteer .
Pritha Mother of Karna, Kunti before her marriage.
Pundarikaksha Krishna, the lotus-eyed one.
Purochana An architect who built a beautiful wax
palace named “Sivam” in V aranavata.
Purumitra A Kaurava warrior .
Pitamaha Literally grand father -which however
carried no imputation of senile  infirmity but
denotes the status of the pater familias.
Purushottamma An epithet of Sri Krishna. It is one of
the names of V ishnu and means the Supreme
Being.
Raibhya A sage whose hermitage was situated on
the bank s of the Ganga. It was visited by the
Pandavas during their wanderings. This ghat
was very holy. Bharata, son of Dasaratha
bathed here. Indra was cleansed of his sin of
killing Vritra unfairly by bathing in this ghat.
Sanatkumar became one with God. Aditi,
mother of the gods prayed here to be blessed
with a son.
Radheya Son of Radha a name of Karna, who as
a foundling was brought up as a son by Radha,
the wife of the Charioteer Adhiratha.
Rajasuya A sacrifice performed by a king to be
entitled to assume the title of “Emperor”.Ravana King of Lanka who abducted Sita, the beautiful wife
of Ramachandra.
Rishabha The second note of the Indian gamut
(Shadja, risha bha, gandhara , madhyama,
panchama, daivata, nishada - sa, ri, ga, ma, pa,
dha, ni.)
Rishyasringa Son of sage Vibhandaka, who had grown
up seeing no mortal except his father . He was
invited by the king of Anga which was
afflicted with a dire-famine, to bring rain and
plenty .
Romapada King of Anga which was once visited by a great
drought.
Rudra One of the names of Siva.
Rudra dance Siva’ s cosmic dance of destruction.
Rukma Heir-apparent to the throne of
Vidarbha. When defeated by Balarama and
Krishna he established a new city Bhojakata,
ashamed to return to Kundinapura, the capital
of Vidarbha, and ruled over it.
Sachidevi Wife of Indra, king of the gods on whom
Nahusha’ s evil eye fell. She was also known as
Indrani.
Sahadeva Youngest of the Pandava princes who
offered the first honours to Krishna at the
Rajasuya sacrifice.
Saibya A ruler friendly to the Pandavas.
Sairandhri A maid  servant or female attendant
employed in royal female apartments.
Sakuni He played dice on behalf of the
Kauravas and succeeded in defeating thePandavas by a stratagem. As a result the latter
had to go and live in the fores t for 13 years.
According to the conditions of the game, the
thirteenth and last year of exile was to be spent
incognito. If discovered by anyone they were
again to repair to the forests for a like term. He
was considered to be the evil genius, who
beguiled Duryodhana to take to evil ways.
Salva Friend of Sisupala, who besieged
Dwaraka Sri Krishna’ s kingd om to avenge
Sisupala’ s death at the latter ’s hand.
Salya Ruler of Madrad esa and brother of Madri
and uncle of the Pandavas who because of
having received hospitality from Duryodhana
went over to his side.
Samsaptaka One who has taken a vow to conquer or
die, and never to retreat. The Samsaptakas
were suicide-squ ads, vowed to some desperate
deed- of derring-do.
Samvarta Brihaspati’ s younger brother , a person of great
learning.
Samba A Yadava youngster dressed as a
woman who gave birth to a mace, as foretold
by rishis.
Sanga Son of Virata. When king Virata was
wounded, he had to get into Sanga’ s chariot,
having lost his chariot, horses and charioteer .
Sanjaya The narrator who tells blind
Dhritarashtra the progress of the war from day
to day. He told the king that a victim of adverse
fate would first become pervert ed and lose his
sense of right and wrong. Time would destroyhis reason and drive him to his own
destruction.
Sankula Y udhha A melee, confused fight, a soldiers
battle as distinguished from the  combats of
heroes.
Santa Wife of sage Rishyasringa.
Santanu King of Hastinapura, father of Bhishma.
Sanyasin One who has renounced the world and its concerns.
Sarasana One of the Kaurava brothers who died in the war .
Sarmishtha Princes and daughter of king
Vrishaparva who got angry with Devayani and
slapped and pushed her into a dry well.
Satanika Virata’ s son whose head was severed by Drona.
Satyajit A Panchala prince, a hero who stood by
Yudhishthira to prevent his being taken
prisoner by Drona, while Arjuna was away
answering a challenge by the Samsaptakas (the
Trigartas).
Satyaki A Yadava warrior , friend of Krishna and
the Pandavas who advocated collecting their
forces and defeating the unrighteous
Duryodhana.
Satyavati A fisherman’ s daughter who possessed
uncommon beauty and emanated a divinely
sweet fragrance and king Santanu became
enamoured of her married her and made her his
queen.
Satyavrata Warrior on the Kaurava side.
Saugandhika A plant that produced a very beautiful
and fragrant flower that Bhima went to get for
Draupadi.Savyasachin Ambidexter -one who can use both hands with
equal facility and ef fect.
A name of Arjuna who could use his bow with the
same skill with either hands.
Sikhandin A girl turned man, warrior on the
Pandava side who restored order among
scattered, subdued soldiers, Drupada’ s son.
Simhanada A lion-note or roar; a deep roar of
defiance or triumph which warriors were wont
to utter to inspire confidence in their friends, of
terror in their enemies.
Saindhava Jayadratha.
Sini One of the suitors to Devaki’ s hand. A kinsman of the
Kauravas.
Sisupala King of Chedi. Died at the hands of
Krishna at the time of Dharmaputra’ s Rajasuya
sacrifice.
Somadutta One of the suitors to Devaki’ s hand. A kinsman of the
Kauravas.
Subahu King of Kulinda in the Himalayas, ally of the
Kauravas.
Subhadra Wife of Arjuna, sister of Sri Krishna and mother of
Abhimanyu.
Sudakshina A warrior on the Kaurava side.
Sudarsana A warrior on the Kaurava army .
Sudeshna Queen of King V irata whom Sairandhri (Draupadi)
served.
Sugriva Monkey-king, friend of Sri Rama, and
brother of mighty V ali whom Sri Rama killed.Sujata Daughter of Sage Uddalaka and wife of
Kagola, his disciple who had virtue and
devotion but not much of erudi tion, mother of
Ashtavakra.
Suka A sage, son of Vyasa, who related the
Srimad Bhagavata to King Parikshit, grandson
of Arjuna.
Sumitra Abhimanyu’ s charioteer .
Supratika Name of King Bhagadatta’ s elephant.
Susarma King of T rigarta, a supporter of the
Kauravas who backed the Proposal to invade
Matsya, V irata’ s country .
Suvarna A soldier on the Kaurava side.
Sri Rama Also known as Rama, Ramachandra or
Sri Ram a. Hanuman tells Bhima how he was
deeply thrilled when he happ ened to touch
Rama’ s body , This king of Ayodhya was
banished to the forest for 14 years, killed
Ravana the king of Lanka who abducted his
wife, Sita.
Srinjayas Pandava supporters.
Srutayu, Astutayu Two brothers fighting on the Kaurava
side attacked Arjuna but were killed.
Srutayudha A Kaurava warrior whose mace hurled at
Krishna rebounded fiercely . killing Srutayudha
himself. His mother Parnasa had obtained that
gift from Varuna who had specified that the
mace should not be used against one who does
not fight, else it would kill the person who
hurls it.Swar ga The heaven of Indra where mortals after
death enjoy the results of their good deeds on
earth.
Sveta A son of King V irata who fell in battle to Bhishma’ s
arrow .
Tantripala Assumed name of Sahadeva at V irata’ s court.
Uddalaka A great sage and teacher of V edanta.
Umadevi Wife of Siva.
Unchhavritti The life of a mendicant, begging his food.
Upachitra One of King Dhritarashtra’ s sons who perished in the
war.
Upaplavya A place in Matsya Kingdom, where the
Pandavas settled after their exile of 13 years.
Urvasi An apsara in Indra’ s court, whose
amorous overtures were declined by Arjuna.
Vaisampayana Chief disciple of sage Vyasa who
revealed the epic for the benefit of humanity .
Vaishnava A sacrifice performed by Duryodhana in
the forest. It was also performed by Yayati,
Mandhata, Bharata and others.
Vaishnava mantra An invocation which endows a missile
with some of the irresistible power of V ishnu.
Vajrayudha The weapon with which Indra killed
Visvarupa on suspicion because his mother
belonged to the asura tribe of daityas.
Valala Assumed name of Bhima when he worked as a cook
at Virata’ s court.
Vali Monkey-king, brother of Sugriva.Vanaprastha The third stage of the dvija’ s life, when
he is required to relinquish worldly
responsibilities to his heirs and retires to the
woods with his wife for an anchorite’ s life.
Vandi Court poet of Mithila who on being
defeated by Sage Ashtavak ra in debate
drowned himself in the ocean and went to the
abode of V aruna.
Varanavata A forest in which the Pandavas were
asked to stay in a wax-house which was to be
set on fire at midnight in order to kill the
Pandavas while they were asleep.
Vasishtha A sage who had cursed the eight Vasus to
be born in the world of men as sons of Ganga
and Santanu. Ganga threw her seven children
into the river with a smiling face.
Vasudhana Another warrior who perished in the battle on the
twelfth day .
Vasudeva An epithet of Krishna. It means both son
of Vasudeva and the supreme spirit that
pervades the universe.
Vedavyasa Vyasa, author of the Mahabharata.
Vichitravirya Younger son of Santanu who succeeded
King Chitrangada on the throne of Hastinapura.
He had two sons, Dhritarashtra and Pandu.
Vikarna A son of Dhritarashtra who declared the
staking of Draupadi illegal, as Y udhishthira
himself was a slave and had lost all his rights.
Therefore the Kauravas had not won Draupadi
legally , he held.
Vinda, Anuvinda Two brothers, kings of A vanti, great
soldiers who were on the Kaurava side, theysuffered defeat at the hands of Y udhamanyu.
Virata King of Matsya, the country which was
suggested by Bhima to live in incognito during
the 13th year of their exile.
Visoka Bhima’ s charioteer .
Visvarupa Name of Twash ta’s son who became the
preceptor of the gods, Brihasp ati having left
when insulted by Indra.
Viswarupa All - pervading, all - including form.
See the description in the Bhagavad Gita Ch.
IX.
Vivimsati A Kaurava hero.
Vriddhakshatra King of the Sindhus, father of Jayedratha
into whose lap his son Jayadratha’ s head was
caused to fall by Arjuna after cutting off
Jayadratha’ s head.
Vrika A Panchala prince who fell in battle.
Vrisha, Achala Sakuni’ s brothers.
Vrishnis, Kekayas Tribals who were devoted to the
Pandavas who with Sri Krishna visited the
Pandavas in their exile.
Vrishasena A warrior on the Kaurava side.
Vritra Son of Twashta who was defeated by
Indra’ s weapon Vajrayudha. He was born out
of his father ’s sacrificial flame s and became
Indra’ s mortal enemy .
Vrikodara Wolf-bellied-an epithet of Bhima,
denoting his slimness of waist  and insatiable
hunger .
Vyasa Compiler of the V edas, son of sage Parasara.Vyuha Battle array .
Yama God of death, god of dharma, whose
son was Yudhishthira. It is he whose questions
Yudhishthira answered correctly whereupon his
dead brothers were brought back to life on the
banks of the enchanted pool.
Yajna A sacrifice.
Yaksha A class of demi-gods, subjects of Kubera, the god of
wealth.
Yavakrida Son of Sage Bharadwaja who was bent upon
mastering the V edas.
Yayati Emperor of the Bharata race who rescued
Devayani from the well into which she had
been thrown by Sarmishtha. He later married
both Devayani and Sarmishtha. One of the
ancestors of the Pandavas who became
prematurely old due to Sukracharya’ s curse.
Yudhamanyu A prince supporting the Pandavas.
Yuyudhana Another name of Satyaki.
Yuyutsu A noble son of Dhritarashtra who bent
his head in shame and sorrow when
Yudhishthira lost Draupadi. He also
disapproved of the unfair way in which
Abhimanyu was killed.ABOUT THE AUTHOR
CHAKRA VARTI RAJAGOP ALACHARI, popularly known as “Rajaji” or
“C.R.”, was a great patriot, astute politician, incisive thinker , and one of the
greatest statesme n. A close associate of Mahatma Gandhi, he was an ardent
freedom- fighter . In his capacity successively as Chief Minister of Madras,
Governor of West Bengal. Home Minister and the first Indian Governor -
General of India be rendered yeoman service to the country and left an
indelible impression on our contemporary life.
Rajaji was closely associated with Kulapati Munshiji and he was among the
distinguished founder -members of the Bhavan. The Bhavan had the
privilege of publishing 18 book s (see page ii) authored by him so far, the
copyright of which he gifted to the Bhavan.
Rajaji’ s books on Marcus Aurel ius, the Bhagavad Gita and the Upanishads
are popular . But in Mahabharat a he displays his inimitable flair for telling
stories and applying their moral to the needs of modern times. The stories
were originally written in Tamil and have been rendered into English,
mainly by Rajaji himself. To have preserved the beauty and spirit of the
great original in refined and simple English is an achievement of the highest
order .
Rajaji passed away in 1972 at the age of 94.The Great Panc hatantra T ales 
(For more than  two and a half  millennia,  the Panchatantra  tales  have regaled  children  and adults alike  with 
a moral at the  end of every  story. Some believe  that they  are as old as the RigVeda.  There is also another  
story about  these fables.  According to  it, these  are stories Shiva told  his consort Parvati.  The pre sent series 
is ba sed on the Sanskrit  original.  ) 
A king, worried  that his three  sons are without  the wisdom  to live in a world of wile  and guile,  asks a learned 
man called  Vishnu Sharman  to teach  them  the wa ys of the  world. 
Since  his ward s are dimwits,  Vishnu Sharman  decides  to pass on wi sdom  to them  in the  form  of stories. In 
these  stories, he mak es anima ls speak like  human  beings. Panchatantra  is a collection  of attractiv ely told 
stories  about the  five wa ys that help the  human  being succeed  in life.  Pancha  means  five and tantra  means 
ways or strategies  or principles.  Addres sed to the  king' s children,  the stories are  primari ly about  statecraft  and 
are popular throughout  the world. The five  strategies  are: 
1. Discord among  friends 
2. Gaining  friends 
3. Of crows and o wls 
4. Loss of gains 
5. Impruden ce 
The stories have  been translated  into nearl y every  language  in the world that  has a  script.  The story  form 
appeals  to children  while the wisdom  in them  attracts  adults.  The Panchatantr a collect ion represents  the 
earliest  folk tale  form  in the world of litera ture. There are  several  versions of Panchatantr a tales  in circula tion 
in the world but  the one that  is popular  in India  is the Sanskrit  original  of Vishnu S harm an. 
Very soon, Hamarashehar.Co m will bring to netizens  the oldest  collection  of tales  in the  world as told  by an 
80-year-old teacher  to his roy al wards. The translation  seeks to be as close  to the  Sanskrit original  as possible 
in spirit.  
The stories will  appear in  five sections,  each  representing  a strateg y for getting  over proble ms in life.  They 
are of interest  not ju st for the ruling  class but also  for every  person. The y are all  about  survival  in a 
comp licated world and the several  ways to get  over problems.  The stories based as the y are on hum an nature 
have  an eternal  relevanc e. 
The series begins with  a parent  story  that unfolds story  after stor y; each strung to  the other  by a narrator. Now, it is y our turn to enjoy  these stories as im mortal and fragrant  as the  soil of India.  
The Loss of  Friends 
Once upon a  time,  Amarasakt i ruled  the cit y-state of Mahilarop yam in the south of India.  He had three 
witless  sons who became  a ma tter of endless w orry for hi m. Realizing  that his s ons had no interest  in 
learning,  the king sum moned  his minist ers and said:  
“You know I am  not happy  with m y sons. According  to men  of learning  an unborn son and a stillborn  son are 
better  than  a son who is a dimwit.  What  good is a barren cow?  A son w ho is stupid  will bring  dishonour to 
his father.  How can  I make  them  fit to  be m y successors ? I turn to  you for advice.”  
One of the  minist ers suggested  the na me of Vishnu Sharman,  a great  scholar enjoy ing the respect of hundreds  
of his disciples.  “He is the  most  comp etent  person to tutor  your children.  Entrust  them  to his care  and very 
soon yo u will see the change.”  
The king summ oned  Vishnu Sharman  and pleaded  with  him “Oh, venerable  scholar,  take  pity on me  and 
please  train  my sons into great  scholars and  I will mak e you the lord of hundred villages.”  
Vishnu Sharman  said “Oh, king, listen  to m y pledge. Hundred villages  do not temp t me to vend learning. 
Count  six months  from  toda y. If I do not mak e your children  great  scholars, y ou can ask me  to change m y 
name.” 
The king im mediately called  his sons and handed the m to the care  of the  learned  man.  Sharman  took the m to 
his monast ery where he  started teaching  them  the five  strategies  (Panchatantra).  Keeping his word, he  
finished  the task  the king  entrusted hi m in six mon ths. Since then,  Panchatantra  became  popular  all over  the 
world as children's  guide in  solving  problems  of life. 
Now begins the Loss of Friends (first of the  five strategies)  series. These are  stories that  figure  in a dialogue 
between  two jackals nam ed Karataka  and Daman aka. 
Long,  long ago, a m erchant  named  Vardhaman  lived  in a town in the  south of India. As he was resting on his  
bed one day  it struck him  that mone y was the axis  of the world and that  the more  he had of it  the more  he 
would be  powerful.  Even ene mies  seek  the friendship  of a rich  man,  he told  himse lf. The old become  young 
if they  have  riches and the  young becom e old if  they  do not  have wealth.  Business is one of the six wa ys that 
help man  amass  wealth. This  was his logic.  
Mobilizing  all his wares, Vardham an set out  on an auspicious da y for Madhura in search  of markets  for his 
goods. He began his travel  in a gail y-decorated  cart drawn b y two bullocks.  On the  way , tired  of the long 
haul,  one of the  bullocks nam ed Sanjeevaka  collapsed  in the  middle  of a ju ngle near  river Jamuna.  But the 
merchant  continued  his j ourne y asking  some of his servants to  take care  of the  anima l. But the servants abandoned  the bullock  soon after  their  master  had left.  Joining him  later,  they told hi m that the bullock was 
dead.  
In fact,  Sanjeevaka  was not dead.  Feeding  on the abundant  fresh and tender  grass in the forest,  he regained 
strength  and began  to merri ly explore  the jungle,  dancing and  singing in joy . In the same  forest lived 
Pingalaka,  the lion.  Sanjeevaka,  content  with  his new life in  the jungle would waltz  and sing uproariousl y 
with joy. One day , Pingalaka  and other ani mals  were  drinking water  in the  Jamuna  when the  lion heard  the 
frightening  bellow of the  bullock.  In panic, the  lion withdrew into  the forest and  sat deepl y lost in thought 
and surrounded b y other  anim als. 
Sensing the  predicam ent of their  king, two jackals, Karataka  and Damanaka,  sons of two dismissed  ministers, 
were clueless  as to what  had happened  to their  king. 
“What could  have happened  to the  lord of the  forest,” asked  Damanaka.  
“Why  should  we poke our nose into affairs  that are not  our concern? Haven 't you heard the  story  of the 
monke y which pulled  out the  wedge from  the log,”  asked Damanaka.  
“Sounds interesting.  Why don't you tell me what  happened to  the monke y,” pleaded  Daman aka. 
“Now, listen,”  said Daman aka and began narrating  the story  of the monke y. 
1.The Monke y And T he We dge 
A merch ant once  started  building  a temp le in the m iddle  of his garden. Man y masons  and carpenters  were 
working for the  merchan t. They took ti me off ever y day to go to  the town for their  lunch.  One day , when the 
workers left  for lunch a  batch of monk eys landed  at the  templ e site and began  play ing with  whatever  caught 
their fanc y. One of the monke ys saw a partl y sawed log of wood and a  wedge  fixed in  it so that  it does not 
close  up. 
Curious to  know what  it is, the  monke y began  furiously  tugging  at the  wedge. At last  the wedge  came  off, not 
before  trapping  the legs  of the monke y into the  rift of the log.  Very soon, not able  to get his legs out  of the 
closed  wood, the  monke y died. 
“Therefore,”  Karataka  told Daman aka, “it is not  wise to poke our nose into  affairs that  are not our concern. 
We have a food store.  Why  should we bother ourselves  about this lion?”  Daman aka retorted,  “Food is not  the centre  of our life.  The elders have  said that  wise men  seek the help  of 
the king to  help friends and  harm  foes. There  are hundred  way s of collect ing food. What  matters is a life  full 
of learning,  courage  and wealth.  If living  somehow  is the  goal, even  the crow lives  long eating  leftovers.”  
“True, but we are  not min isters  any more.  The elders  have alwa ys said that the stupid  person w ho offers 
uncalled  for advice  to the  king invites  not onl y insult but  also deceit,”  said Karataka.  
“No,” Daman aka said,  “anyone who serves the  king with devotion  is bound to earn  his favour in  the long run. 
The one who does not rema ins where he is. Those who understand  why the king is angr y or generous  will 
one-day rise in office.  It is necessary  to be in  the good books of the  king.' 
“Okay, what  do yo u want to do now ?” asked  Karataka.  
“You know the king  is scared now. We will  ask him  what frightens hi m and using the  six way s of diplo macy 
get close to  him.”  
“How do yo u know the king is scared?” 
“Changes in posture, signs, pace,  actions,  conversation,  looks and expression indicate  the working of the  
mind.  I will  approach the  fear-struck  king toda y and with m y intelligenc e, I will  dispel his fear  and once 
again  becom e his min ister,”  said Damanaka.  
“How can y ou do it  when yo u do not know principles  of service?” asked Karataka.  
Daman aka told him all he knew and learnt  about  what makes  a good and loy al servant in  the service  of the 
king.  
“In that case,  I wish yo u all good luck,”  said Karataka.  
Taking  leave  of Karataka,  Damanak a then  called  on the  king. Recognizing  that he  was the son of his old 
minister,  King Pingalaka  told his sentr y to bring him  into his presence. Daman aka came down on his knees to  
pay respects  to the  king. 
“We haven't seen  you for a long ti me,”  the king  said. 
“I don 't know of what use I can  be to y ou, my lord. Yet, according  to the learned,  there  are occasions when 
every person ho wever  high or low will  be of use to the  king. For generations  we have  served  the king  with 
devotion.  Yet I a m out of y our majest y's favour.” 
“All right,  competen t or inco mpet ent you are the son of our old m inister.  Go ahead  and tell  me whatever  you 
have  in your mind, ” the king ordered Daman aka. “May I ask y ou humb ly, my lord,  what made  you come  back from  the lake  without  drinking water,”  asked 
Daman aka reluctan tly. 
“O' Damanaka,  haven't y ou heard  the great  and frightening  sounds in the  distance? I want  to leave  this forest. 
The strange ani mal that could mak e such sound s ought  to be as powerful as the  sound s he makes.”  
“Your majest y, if it is onl y sound that  is your proble m; I wish to  submi t that sounds are misle ading.  I can tell 
you the story  of the jackal,  how it overca me the fear  of sound.”  
Let us hear it,  said the  king. 
2.The Jac kal And The Dru m 
A hungry  jackal set  out in search  of food and ended  up at an abandoned  battlefi eld whence  he heard  loud and 
strange  sounds. Scared,  he thought,  “I must  disappear  from  here  before the  man  who is making  these sounds 
gets me.”  After  a while he  told hi mself,  “I must  not run awa y like that.  Let me find out what  reall y the sounds 
are and who is making  them  because whether  it is fear  or happiness one must  know its  cause. Such a person  
will never regret  his actions.  So, let  me first look for the  source  of these noises.” 
Waril y, the jackal m arched  in the direction  of the  sounds and found a drum  there.  It wa s this  drum,  which 
was sending the  sounds whenever the  branches of the  tree above brushed against  it. Relieved,  the jackal 
began  play ing the drum  and thought  that there  could  be food inside  it. The  jackal entered  the drum  by 
piercing  its side. He was disappointed  to find no food in  it. Yet  he consoled hi mself  saying that he  rid himself 
of the  fear of sound. 
“Therefore”,  Damanaka  told king  Pingalaka,  “your majest y should not  be afraid  of sound s. I seek y our 
perm ission  to go and see  what the sounds are.”  
“Okay,” said the  king. Taking  leave  of the king,  Damanaka  proceeded  in the  direction  of the  sound. 
The king now began worry ing himse lf about  Damanaka's  intentions.  “He ma y have  a grudge against  me for 
dismissing  him once.  Such person s seek  revenge. I should not  have taken  him into confidence.  Let me keep 
an eye on him.  Wise men  have alwa ys maintained that it is difficult  to kill  even a  weak man  who does not 
easily trust others  but eas y to kill a strong man  who readil y trusts others,”  the king  thought. 
As the king  kept an e ye on him,  Damanaka  moved  slowly  towards Sanjeevaka, the  bullock,  and found that  he 
was after  all an anim al and thought, “This is a good omen.  This will  help me  to get  back into  the good books 
of the  king. Kings never follow  the advice  of their  ministers  unless the y are in  peril or grief.  Just as a health y 
man never thinks  of a doctor,  a strong and secure king  also never  remem bers the need  for a minist er.” Assured  that what  he saw w as onl y a bullock,  Damanaka  returned to  the king  and told  him what  he sa w. 
“Is it true?” the king  asked. 
“The king is God. The  man  who lies to  a king perishes. He alone  has the  power to grant  favor s.” 
“I believe  you. Great m en do not harm  weaker people.  They take  on only  their  equals. That  is what is unique 
about  brave people.”  
“What y our majest y says is true.  Sanjeevaka  is great.  If yo ur lordship perm its me, I will persuade  him to be 
one of yo ur servants.”  
“All right,  I am  taking  you back  as a minister, ” said the  king, pleased.  
Daman aka at once hurried  back to  Sanjeevaka  and told  him to stop bellowing  and com e and me et his king. 
But the bullock  wanted  who this  Pingalaka  was. “What? Y ou do not  know our lord? Wait,  you will know 
shortl y the cost of this  ignorance.  There  he is, surrounded by  his retinue  under the  bany an tree.”  Sanjeevaka 
thought  his day s were numbered  and pleaded  with  Damanaka,  “Sir, yo u seem  to be a man  of great  wisdom 
and wit. You alone can  save me.  I can come  only  if you can assure me  that no har m will come  to me.” 
Daman aka told the bullock to  wait for the  right  time  to me et the king. 
Returning  to the king, Daman aka told him “My lord, he is not  an ordinary  being.  He is the  vehicle  of Lord 
Shiva.  He told me  that Lord Shiva had  permit ted him to feed  on the  tender grass in the  neighborhood of 
Jamuna.  But I told  him that the forest belonged  to our lion  king who is the  vehicle  of goddess Chandika. You  
are our guest. You can see our king  and seek a separate  space  for yo u to graze.  He agreed  to this plan 
provided  he has an assurance  from  your majest y.” 
“Yes, certainl y. But I will  need assurance  from  him in return.  Bring him  here,” the  king told  Damanaka. 
Going back  to the  bullock  Damanaka  advised him,  “You have the  assurance  of the  king. But this  new 
position  should not go to  your head. We  have to work together.  That  is how we can prosper. Otherwise, he  
who does not respect  every one, however  high or low, will  forfeit  the favour  of kings like  Dantila.”  
“What about  Dantila?” asked  Sanjeevaka.  
3.The F all And Rise Of  A Merchant 
In the  city of Vardhaman,  there lived  a wealth y merchant  named  Dantila. He held  a great  reception  for his 
wedding  attended  by the king, the queen,  their  minist ers and all  the rich and influenti al persons in the  city. 
Present  at the  reception  was G orambh a, a lowl y sweeper  in the  royal household.  When Dantila  saw him 
occup ying a seat  reserved for the  nobles of the  king, he ordered  his servants to throw him  out of his house. Thus insulted,  Gorambha  thought to  himself,  “I am a poor man  and so cannot  give  a fitting  reply to such a 
wealth y person as Dantila.  I must  some  how see  that the  king stops his favours to him. ” Then  he hit  upon a 
plan to take  revenge  on Dantila.  
One earl y morning  when the king  was still  in sleep,  Gorambha  pretending  to sweep  the king's bedroom  began 
loudl y murm uring,  “Oh, how arrogant is Dantila!  He has the  cheek  to lock  the queen  in his embra ce.” 
Hearing  this, the  king demand ed to know whether  what Gorambh  was murm uring  is true. Did Dantila  
embr ace the queen? 
“Oh, your majest y, I don't re mem ber nor do I know w hat I wa s saying because I was drow sy having  spent the 
entire  night  in ga mbling,”  the sweeper  told the  king. 
Not satisfied  with his repl y the king thought  that it was po ssible  that the sweeper  had seen Dantila,  who had 
equal  access to  the ro yal household as Gorambha,  embrac ing the queen. He reme mbered wise men  saying 
that men  were likel y to talk in  their  sleep about  what they did, saw and desired in  the da y. Wom en were 
chaste  because  men  were not  within reach  or the y were afraid  of pry ing servants. Convinced  that Dantila  had 
indeed  embra ced the queen,  the king barred  Dantila  from  entering  the ro yal household.  
The merchan t began  grieving  his fate though  he had not  done any  harm  to the  king or his relatives  even  in his 
dreams. One day as Dantila  was try ing to enter the  king's palace  he was barred b y the king's men.  Seeing  this 
Gorambha  told the m, “You fools, y ou are barring the  great  Dantila  who has w on the  king' s favours. He is 
powerful.  If yo u stop him,  you will mee t with the  same  fate as I did  at the  hands of Dantila  one da y.” 
The merchan t thought  that it would do hi m good to m ake Gorambha  happy  and win his confidence.  One 
evening  he invited  the sweeper for tea  and presented  him with expensive  clothes  and told  him,  “Friend,  I had 
never  meant  to insult  you. You had occupied  a seat  I had set apart  for the  learned.  Kindly  pardon me. ” 
Pleased,  the sweeper prom ised to win the  king's favour for Dantila  again.  The next  day, Gorambha  repeated 
the same  dram a of pretending  to talk irrelevantl y, raving that  the king was eating  cucumber  in the  rest room. 
“What nonsense are  you talking? Did y ou ever  see me doing  such things ?” the  king dem anded  to know. “N o, 
your majest y. I do not know nor do I remem ber what I was say ing because  I wa s drowsy  having spent the 
entire  night  in ga mbling,”  the sweeper  said. 
The king then  realized  that if what the sweeper  had said about  him was not true  what he had  said about 
Dantila  also could not  be true. A person like  Dantila  could  not have  done w hat Gorambha  had told hi m. The 
king also found that  without Dantila  the affairs  of the state  had suffered  and civic  admin istrat ion had com e to 
a stand still. The king  imm ediately sum moned  the merchant  to his palace  and restored to  him all the authorit y 
he had en joyed before he fell  out of king' s favour.  
Daman aka resumed,  “That is why  we must  know that  pride  goes before fall.”  Sanjeevaka  agreed.  Taking  him 
to the lion  king, Damanak a introduced  Sanjeevaka  to Pingalaka.  After  exchanging  pleasantries,  the king 
asked hi m to relate  his past and the  purpose of stay ing in that jungle.  On the  bullock  relating  his stor y, the 
king said, “ Friend, don't be  afraid.  I assure y ou that I will  protect  you from  wild  anima ls here because  even 
stronger  anima ls feel insecure here.”  Since  then, the  king asked  Karataka  and Damanaka  to look after  the affairs of the  state  and began  happily 
spending  his time  in the  compan y of San jeevaka.  But the  jackals were worried that  after  Sanjeevaka  had 
beco me a good friend of the  king, the  king gave  up his roy al sports and pastim e and beca me a saint.  
The jackal  twins thought,  “the king has stopped taking  us into  confidence  after  Sanjeevaka  beca me his best 
friend.  He is also indifferent  to his kingl y duties. What  shall we do now? ” 
Karataka  said,  “The king  may not heed our advice.  But it  is our dut y to advise him  on it  if it is good for him. 
Elders  have alwa ys held that  even  if the king  is not willing  to heed  good advice,  it is the dut y of his ministers 
to offer him  advice.  “You are right,”  said Damanak a. “The mistak e is min e. What  happened  to the sage  and 
the jackal should not  happen to  us.” 
Karataka  then  pleaded  with him  to tell  the stor y of the  sage and the  jackal.  Damanak a began  telling  him.  
4.The Foolish  Sage A nd The Jackal  
In a monaster y far away  from  human  habitation  lived a  saint called  Deva Sarma.  He am assed  a lot  of wealth 
by selling  clothes  gifted  to him  by well- wishers and disciples.  It became  a burden for hi m to guard  that 
wealth.  Since  he did not  trust any one, he put all  his mone y into a bag  and carried  it with him  wherever  he 
went.  Ashadhabhooti,  an experienced  cheat,  noticed  Deva Sarma  carry ing his bag alway s with hi m and 
assuming  that it  certainl y contained  someth ing valuable,  began planning  to snatch  it from  him.  
One da y, the cheat  met the saint and promp tly fell on his feet  and said,  “Oh, kno w-all,  I have  realized  that 
this life is an illusion;  youth is fleeting  and all  familial ties are like  a dream.  Please  show me  the correct  path 
that delivers  me from  all worldly  ties.”  
Pleased  with his humi lity, Deva Sarma  said, “Child,  you are the  blessed one who has thought of renouncing  
worldl y pleasures. Listen,  however low his caste  is, the person that  chants  “Om Namahsiva yah' and smears 
holy ash on his forehead, beco mes Siva hi mself  and knows no rebirth.  I shall accept  you as m y protégé  but 
you must  not enter  the herm itage in the  night  because comp any is forbidden  for saints. After initia tion, you 
have  to live  in the  hut at  the entrance  of the monast ery.” 
Ashadhabhooti  promised  the saint  that he  would consider ever y sign from  him as a comm and and carr y it out. 
Satisfied,  the saint accepted  the cheat  as his disciple.  Ashadhabhooti  too began making  Deva Sarma  happy  by 
attending  to ever y need of his. But seeing  that the saint  never  separated  the mone y-bag from  his person, 
Ashadhabhooti  thought, “the old  man  is ver y craft y and keeps the bag  alway s with him.  How can  I snatch  it 
from  him? Shall  I kill  him?”  
As the cheat  was at a  loss to achieve  his goal,  the son of a disciple  came calling  on the sage.  The visitor 
invited  Deva Sarma  to come  to his village  and perform  the sacred thread  cerem ony of his son. The saint  
accepted  the invita tion and set out for the  village  taking  Ashadhabhooti  with him.  
On the  way, the guru and his disciple  had to cross a river. After  bathing  in the  river and wanting  to rest  for a 
while,  Deva Sarma  took the  mone y bag and  pushed it into  a quilt  he was carry ing and told  the disciple,  “I have  to respond to nature’s  call.  I am  leaving  this hol y quilt  of Siva  here. Keep an  eye on it.”  The mom ent the 
guru went  out of his sight, Ashadhabhooti  collected  the bag  and fled the  place.  
With  great  trust in  his disciple,  Deva Sarma  decided  to spend tim e by joining a crowd watching  two well- fed 
goats  fighting  ferociously . As blood was running down their  heads, a jackal ca me there to  feast on the  blood 
the two goats were shedding.  Deva Sarma  saw the jackal  entering  the scene and thought  that the jackal  would 
surel y die caught  between  the two warring  goats. Hi s surmise  came  true and  the jackal  died, gored  by the two 
goats.  
Brooding  over the de mise  of the  jackal, Deva  Sarma  returned  to where he  had left  the mon ey-bag with 
Ashadhabhooti  and panicked  when he found Ashadhabhooti  missing.  The holy  quilt  was there but  not the 
mone y-bag in it.  He began  wailing,  “Oh, trickster,  what have y ou done? I have lost  every thing in this world.” 
After  a vain search  for the trickster,  the foolish saint  returned  home  dejected.  
Daman aka asked Karataka,  “What do y ou learn  from  this episode?” 
“You alone  can tell me.”  
“The sage and the  jackal  have none to  blame  except  themse lves.”  
“In a simil ar situation,  what  should  we do?” 
Daman aka said,  “Yes, I know what to  do no w. With  my cunning  I will  create  a rift  between  king Pingalaka 
and Sanjeevaka.  Haven't y ou heard  that though yo u cannot  subdue  the ene my with a  volle y of arro ws, y ou 
can destroy  him by your wit?” 
“Wait,”  said Karataka.  “Suppose the  lion king  and the roving  bullock  comes  to know of y our plans to 
separate  them, get ready  to meet  your end.” 
“My friend,  you are too  pessimistic.  When ti me and tide are against  you, don't give  up. Wise men  keep on 
trying till they succeed  in getting  what the y want. Haven't y ou heard  the elders  saying?” 
“The Goddes s of Wealth  favours the man  who persists.
Pray God by  all means,  but put in y our own effort.
Even  if you don't succeed,  you will be free of bla me.”  
Karataka  was not convinced  that Damanak a could  create  rift between  the fierce  lion king and the  wise 
bullock.  
Daman aka told him,  “Here is how through cunning  two crow s, husband and wife,  managed  to save their 
children  from  a cobra.  Every  time, the wife hatched  the eggs, a cobra  would come  and feast on the  offspring. 
The couple  asked a jackal  who was their  friend to  show them  the wa y. The jackal told  the crow not to despair  for there  is noting  that a trick  cannot  achieve.  That  is how a crab killed  a greedy  crane  that was prey ing on 
the fish in the  lake.  The fema le crow asked  the jackal  how the  crab had  killed  the crane.”  
Daman aka then  asked Karataka  to listen  to the stor y of the  crane  and the crab.  
5.The Craft y Crane A nd The Craftier  Crab 
Once upon a  time  an old  crane lived  on the  rim of a large  lake in  the midd le of a j ungle.  Because of age,  it 
was not able  to pre y on fish and other insects.  Unable to  suffer  hunger, the  crane stood on the  edge of the 
lake and began  crying pitiab ly. Moved at  the sight, a  crab passing b y asked the  crane:  
“Friend,  what is the  matt er? Wh y are y ou not hunting  for food toda y?” 
“Son, y ou have  correctl y guessed. I am  feeling  guilt y because I have  swallowed  too m any fish. I have 
decided  to fast unto death  and am  not harm ing even  the fish that  are within m y reach,”  said the  crane. 
“But why  are y ou so philosophical  toda y,” asked the  crab. 
“What shall  I tell  you? I have  heard that  there  will be no rains for the  coming  twelve  years. Astrologers  have 
forecast  an evil  conjunction  of the planets.  As a result, there  won't be rains on this  earth  for another twelve  
years. All these y ears we have  all play ed and lived  together.  I am  now worried about  the fate waiting  for 
these  poor fish and other  creatures  in the  lake. The y will die and I will  be alone  and without  them. ” 
“Is there  no way  we can save  ourselves?” 
“At pre sent, fish and other  water creatures  in other lakes  are migr ating  to bigger  lakes with  the help  of their 
relativ es. Here, nobody  seems  to worr y about  the dark future.  At this rate,  there  won 't be any  kind  of fish 
left.”  
The crab carried  this informat ion to all the fish and other  water creatures  in the lake.  Alarm ed, all of them 
came to the crane  and pleaded  with  him to show them  the way to overcome  this danger.  
“Why  not. There  is a big lake  not far from  here  that has plent y of water  throughout  the y ear and lotuses 
alwa ys in bloom.  That  lake  does not go dr y even  if there  are no rains for twenty -four y ears. I can ferr y all of 
you one by one to that  lake.”  
The poor fish and other  water creatures  at once put  all the  trust in  the crane  and agreed  to be  ferried. Ever y 
day, the crane  would take  one of them  at a time  to a lonely  place,  smash the m against  a stone  and eat  them. 
He would return  to the  lake  and repeat  the trick  ever y day. One da y the crab  asked the crane,  “Uncle,  you are taking  ever yone to the  faraway  lake  and not  me. Why don't 
you take  me there  today  and save  my life?” 
Tired  with eating  fish every  day, the crane  too was happy  to carr y the crab  to the  lake  that did  not exist.  The 
crab was happ y and mounted  on the back  of the crane.  As the crane  was flying close  to the  spot where he ate 
all the fish, the crab  saw a heap of fish bones and asked  the crane,  “Uncle,  we have come  a long distance  and 
I see no lake  anywhere.  Tell me, where  is the lake?” 
“You are  a fool to  trust me.  There is no lake.  Nor is there  water. Sa y your prayers now; I am  going to  kill 
you.” The craft y crab at  once caught  the neck of the  crane  in his claws and tore  through it  to death.  Slowly , 
carrying the crane's neck, the  crab reached  the lake  where all his friends, worried that  the crane  did not com e 
back,  asked him  what made  him com e back.  
The crab said,  “you  fools, that  crane was taking  all of us to a lonel y place  where it  would smash  the victi ms 
against  a rock  and have the m for lunch.  I found out his misch ief and saved m yself by slicing  his neck.  From 
today, all of us can  live happil y without fear.”  
Then  the crows asked the  jackal  how they  could  get rid of the  cobra that  was feasting on their  offspring. The 
jackal  told the m to go to a big  city and s natch  any item  of jeweller y from  a palace  and drop it  in the  hollow of 
the tree that is the cobra's home.  In search of the  jeweller y, the king' s men  would reach  the tree  and kill  the 
cobra.  
The crow couple  flew off to a lake  where the  women  in the king's harem  were revealing  in water. Before 
entering  water,  the women  left their  jeweller y and clothes  on the  waterside.  The fema le crow skillfull y dived 
and snatched  a gold necklace  and began slowly  flying towards the cobra's hideout.  The king' s men  who s aw 
the crow fly  off with the  necklace  followed the  femal e crow and saw it  dropping the  necklace  into the hollow 
of the  tree.  They  ran to  the tree  and pulling  it out killed  the cobra.  
“That's w hy,” Damanaka  told Karataka,  “elders say  that he who is wi se is stronger than  the strong. That  is 
how a smal l hare  killed  the al migh ty lion.”  
“How is that?” asked Karataka.  
"That  is another  story ,” said Daman aka. 
6.The Cunning Hare and The Witless  Lion 
Bhasuraka  was a lion lording  over the  jungle,  killing  deer,  boar s, rabbits,  bisons, etc.  Yet he was not happy 
with his kill.  The victi ms too were unhappy  and me t the lion one day  in a delegation.  “Oh, lord,”  they  said, 
“why do y ou kill so man y animals  every  day when y ou need  only  one for y our food? Let us come  to an 
understanding.  From  toda y, you need not  move  from  your place.  We will  send an anim al ever y day to you. 
That will spare you the trouble of hunting  and us our lives.”  “Our forebears  have said that  the duty  of the  king is to rule  and not  to destroy . Just as a seed sprouts, grow s 
into a tree  and y ields fruit,  a people  protected  by the king come  to his rescue  in tim es of need.”  
“What y ou say is true,”  the lion said  and added a  condition.  “If you fail to send one ani mal every  day, I shall 
kill all of you.” 
“Agreed,”  said the  anima ls and began  roaming  the forest without  fear and sending one of their  own folk to 
the lion for his lunch. One da y it was the turn of a  hare. He started  leisurel y on his last  journe y and saw a big 
well on the wa y and saw his own reflection  when he peeped  into the  well from  curiosit y. 
Suddenl y an idea  struck the  hare. “I  will somehow  temp t the lion to  the well  and persuade  him to jump into 
it,” the hare thought  to himse lf. It was late  in the evening  when the  hare reached  the lion's den. The lion  was 
hungr y and so angr y and decided  to kill  all the anima ls when the hare  came  and knelt  before  him.  
“First, you are too sma ll for m y lunch. Second,  you have come  late.  I shall  kill you and all  the others  too,” the 
lion warned the  hare. 
“My lord,  it is not  my fault  or the fault  of other  anim als.” 
“Let m e know w ho it is who dela yed you and I will  kill him at once.”  
“Our folks have  decided  that it is m y turn toda y. Since I do not  make  a full me al, they have  sent three  more 
hares with  me for y our meal. As we were all  coming  to you, a big  lion ca me out of his den and dem anded  to 
know where we were all  going.”  
“We are all  going  to Bhasuraka as his me al according  to our arrangem ent, we s aid. The big  lion said  that this 
jungle belonged  to hi m and that  all animals  obeyed its orders. He also told  us that  you are a cheat  and asked 
us to bring  you to him  for a trial  of strength.  Whoever is the  victor  will become  the king.  He commanded  me 
to summon you to his fort.  That's w hy I am late.  It is no w for y ou to decide,”  the hare  told the lion.  
“In that case,”  Bhasuraka  told the  hare, “s how me  that lion.  I will  kill him and have him  for lunch. According  
to the elders  territor y, friendship  and gold are  the rewards of war. Wise men  do not go to  war unles s there  are 
gains.”  
“Yes, m y lord,”  said the  hare, “w hat you say is true. But  the big  lion lives  in a fort.  He kno ws that  the king 
without  a fort  is like a  cobra without  fangs and an elephant  without heat.”  
“Stop that  nonsense and  bring him  here. Don 't you know that  you have  to crush the  enem y and disease at  the 
first opportunit y? Otherwise, the y will grow in strength  and crush yo u.” 
“But the big  lion seems  to be ver y strong. Haven't  you heard elders  saying that one should not go to  war 
without  asse ssing one's own strength and  the strength  of the ene my? He who mee ts the ene my in haste  will perish  like the  locusts in  a fire.”  
Growing impa tient, the lion roared,  “why all this tall  talk.  Show him  to me.”  Asking the  lion to  accomp any 
him, the hare took hi m to the  well.  He told  the lion that  the big lion  was there  in that fort and sho wed him the 
well.  The lion  then  peeped into  the well and m istaking  his reflection  in the water  for the big  lion jumped  into 
the well to  kill him.  Thus the  foolish lion  perished and  all the ani mals  in the jungle lived  happil y ever  after. 
Daman aka resumed,  “This is how with m y skills I will  create  a rift  between  Pingalaka  and Sanjeevaka.”  
“All right,  best of luck to  you,” said Karataka.  
One da y when Pingalaka  was alone,  Damanaka  visited  him and bo wed to him.  
“We haven't seen  you for a long ti me,”  said Pingalaka.  “Of what use am  I to y ou? Yet,  when y our rule is 
breaking  up, I thought  I should  inform  you. Even  without  asking, offer good advice  to him whom  you want 
to protect  from  indignit y, said our elders.” 
“Whatever  you want to sa y, say it without  hesitation.”  
Gathering  courage,  Damanaka  said, “My  lord, Sanjeevaka  wants to harm  you. Taking m e into confidence,  he 
once  told m e that he would kill  you, beco me the king and m ake me a min ister.”  
“But San jeevaka  is a trusted friend  of mine.  Why  should  he think  of harming  me?”  
“There is no lo yal or dislo yal servant.  There is no servant  who doe s not  covet  power. My lord,  what made 
you to take Sanjeevaka  into confidence? Don 't think he  is a strong anim al able  to kill your enemies.  This will 
not happen because  he is a vegetarian  and m y lord feasts on mea t. It is better  to get  rid of him.”  
“You rem ember I gave him  the word on y our advice.  How can  I kill  him who has won as surance  from  me.”  
“My lord,  according  to wise men,  you should not  make  friends with people  you do not know. You kno w how 
an innocent  flea died for the  fault  of a bug.” 
Pingalaka  demanded  to know the stor y. Damanak a began  to relate.  
7.The B ug and The Poor Flea 
Once upon a  time  a bug nam ed Mandavisarpini  made  for itself  a smal l home  in the  folds of the mi lk-white 
sheets of linen  spread  on the king's ornament al bed. O ne day, the bug s aw a flea  drifting  into the king's 
bedroom  and told  the flea  that he had  come  to a wrong place  and asked him  to leave  before  somebod y noticed  him. 
The flea,  whose nam e was A gnimukh a, said, “O h venerable  sir, it is not  proper for yo u to ask a guest  to leave 
even  if he is a  wicked person. You must  welcom e him,  ask him  about  his health,  say word s that  comfor t him 
and request him  to take  rest. That  is how good ho sts treat  their  guests. Besides, I have  tasted  the blood  of a 
variet y of m en and ani mals.  Never  did I taste  royal blood.  The king's blood is a co mpound  of rich  food s and 
is bound to  taste rich.  Please  permit  me to relish this  delicac y.” 
The flea continued,  “Ever ything we do in  this world we do to slake  our hunger. I have com e to you in search 
of food. It  is not proper for y ou to siphon off the king's blood all  alone.  You s hould  share it with  me also.”  
The bug told hi m, “oh, flea,  I suck the  blood of the  king when he is fast asleep.  You are imp atient. You have 
to wait till  I finish m y job. A fter me, you can have y our fill.”  The flea  agreed.  
Meanwhile,  the king entered  his bedroom  to sleep. But  the i mpati ent flea began  feasting  on the king's blood  
even  before he  went to sleep.  Stung by  his bite,  the king  rose from  his bed and asked his servants  to look for 
what  was in the  bed that  caused  him discomfor t. The king' s men  pulled  the linen  off the  bed and exa mined  it 
closel y. Before  they  could  him,  the flea sneaked into  a recess of the  bed. The  servants found the poor bug and  
killed  him at once. 
Daman aka told Pingalaka,  “This is w hy you should kill  Sanjeevaka  before he could  kill you. He who 
abandons a  trusted confidant  and trusts an outsider  will die  like sage Kakudruma.”  
“How did he die?” Pinagalaka  asked him.  
8.The Story  of The Blue Jackal  
Chandaraka  was a jackal  living  in a forest. One da y, driven b y hunger, he  came  to a nearb y town in search  of 
food. Seeing  him,  a group of mongrels  began  chasing and  attacking  him whenever possible.  The jackal  fled 
in panic and  entering  the house of a  washer m an hid in  a vat  full of blue  used for bleaching  clothes.  When he 
came out, he becam e a blue ani mal. Thinking  that he  was not  the jackal  they  chased,  the mongre ls dispersed. 
The jackal  came back  to the  forest with his bod y dyed in blue.  When the  lions, tigers, panthers,  wolves and 
other  anim als in the  forest saw him,  they took fright  and ran  in all  directions.  They  thought  to the mselves, 
“We do not know his power and strength.  It is better  we keep  a distance  from  him.  Haven't the  elders warned 
not to trust him  who se conduct, caste  and courage  are not known.” 
Seeing  them  scared, the  dyed jackal  said, “Why do y ou run awa y like that.  There  is no need to  fear. I am  a 
special  creation  of G od. He told  me that the ani mals  in the jungle here  had no ruler  and that  he was 
nomin ating  me as your king.  He named  me as Kakudruma  and told me  to rule  all of yo u. Therefore  all of yo u 
can live safely  under the  umbrel la of m y protection.”  All the ani mals  in the jungle accepted  him as the king. He in  turn appointed  the lion as his min ister,  the tiger 
as his cha mberla in and the  wolf as the  gatekeeper.  After distributing  office  to the ani mals,  the new king 
Kakudruma  banished all  the jackals  in the  forest. The  lions, tigers  and the wolves killed  other ani mals  and 
brought  them  as food for the  king. Taking  his share, Kakudruma  would distribute  the rest of the  kill among 
his sub jects.  
One da y when the  blue  jackal  was holding court,  he heard  a gang of jackals howling.  Thrilled  by the sound of 
his own ilk,Kakudrum a began  loudly  responding  in his natural  voice.  The lions  and other  anima ls 
immediately recognized  that their  king  was after  all a jackal  and not a Godsend. The y at once  pounced on the 
blue jackal and  killed  him.  
“The moral  is,” Damanak a said, “he who abandons his o wn folk  will perish.”  
“But how do I believe  that Sanjeevaka  has evil  intentions,”  asked Pingalaka.  
“He told  me today  that he would kill  you tomorrow.  If yo u notice  him carefull y tomorrow,  you will find hi m 
red-eyed and occup ying a seat  he does not deserve.  He w ould stare at  you angril y. If w hat I say  comes  true,  it 
is for y ou what  to do with Pingalaka,”  said Damanaka.  
After  this mee ting with  the lion  king, Daman aka went  to mee t Pingalaka.  The bullock  received  him with 
courtes y and said, “We are m eeting  after  a long ti me. What can  I do for yo u? They are the  blessed w ho are 
visited  by friends.”  
“Your are  right, sir. But  where is rest for servants. The y have lost  their  freedom  for the  sake of mone y. They 
know no sleep, no interest  in food nor can the y speak without  fear. Yet  they  live.  Somebod y has rightl y 
comp ared service  to a dog's life,”  said Daman aka. 
“Come  to the  point,  my friend”  The bullock  was now impat ient. 
Daman aka said,  “Sir, a min ister is not  supposed to  give bad advice.  He cannot  also disclose state  secrets. If 
he does, he will go to  hell after his death.  But in the  cause of yo ur friendship,  I have revealed  a secret. It  is on 
my suggestion  that you have taken  up service  in the  royal household.  Pingalaka  has evil  designs against y ou. 
When  we were alone,  he told  me he would kill  you and bring happiness to ever yone in the palace.  
“I told the  king that  this was stabbing  a friend in  the back,”  Damanak a continued.  “The king was angry  and 
said that y ou were  a vegetarian  and he lived  on a diet  of mea t and so there  was natural  discord between  you 
and him.  He said that  this was enough reason  for him  to kill you. This is a secret  I have kept  to m yself for a 
long time.  It is now for yo u to do what is necessar y.” 
Sanjeevaka  fainted  on hearing  these words. Recovering  after some  time,  he said, “It is trul y said that  a person 
who serves the king  is like  a bullock  without horns. It is difficul t to know the  mind  of a king who ha s 
different  ideas.  It is not  easy  to serve a  king. Even sages could  not read  the minds  of kings. I think some  
servants who were jealous of m y friendship with the  king must  have poisoned his m ind.”  “Don't worry ,” Damanak a said. “F orget  what tales  the servants carried  to the  king. You can still  win his 
favour  by your sweet  words.” 
“That is not  true. It  is impossible  to live  with wicked  people, however  small  they  are. They  can alway s think 
of a hundred way s to get y ou in the same  manner  the jackal  and crow trapped  the ca mel.”  
“Sounds interesting.  Let me know w hat happened  to the  camel, ” asked Daman aka. 
Sanjeevaka  began to  tell him the story. 
9.The C amel, The Jac kal And The Cro w 
In a far off forest, there  lived  a lion  named  Madotkata  served by  a leopard,  a jackal  and a crow. One day  they 
sighted  Kradanaka,  a came l who lost his wa y. Thinking  the came l they saw was an unusual ani mal, the lion 
asked his assistants  to find out  if he was a wild ani mal or domesti c anim al. 
The crow said that  the ca mel was a domestic  anim al fit to be  killed  and eaten.  Refusing to  eat Kradanaka,  the 
lion said:  
“I shall not kill  someone  who came  seeking hospitalit y. According to  our elders, y ou cannot  kill even an 
enemy who came  trusting  you. He who kills  so commits the sin of killing  hundred Brahmins.  Assure him of 
safet y and bring hi m to me. ” 
The three  assistants  brought the  came l to the  presence  of the lion.  On the lion  asking the  came l to relate  his 
story, Kradanaka  told him how he was part of a  trade caravan  and how he  had lost his wa y. The lion told  the 
camel, “Kradanaka,  why do y ou go back  to your village  and become  once again  a beast of burden?  Remain 
with us without  any hesitation  and feast on this  tender  gras s.” Thereaft er, the came l stayed on to live  happil y 
with the lion  and his three  assistants. 
One da y, the lion was locked  in a battle  with  an elephant.  The tusker gored Madotkata  and badly  injured him. 
Hebeca me too weak to hunt.  Without  food he was in no position  to do an ything.  Then, the  lion asked the 
assistants to  go out and look  for s ome anim al for his m eal. "Bring the  anima l here.  I will kill  him somehow 
and provide food for y ou all,”  said the lion.  
The leopard,  the jackal,  and the  camel  looked  every wher e for an ani mal but could  not find  anyone. The jackal 
told the crow aside:  
“Friend,  what is the  use of wa sting  time like this? We have Kradanaka,  our lord's loy al friend. Let  us kill  him 
and survive.”  “That is fine.  Yet we cannot  kill him because  our lord has assured him  protection,”  said the 
crow.” “Leave  it to me. I shall  convince  Madotkata  to kill  the came l. Wait  here.  I will  meet  the lord  and get his 
perm ission,”  said the  jackal and  left to mee t the lion. 
The jackal  told his lord, “O h, lord,  we went  to ever y nook and corner of the  forest. We  could not find  a single 
animal. We are  tired,  weak and hungr y. Since  my lord is also  in the same  condition,  I humbl y sugge st that we 
make a me al of this came l.” 
Highl y annoy ed, the lion said,  “You sinner, if y ou repeat  these  words, I shall  first kill  you. I have given  him 
my word. How can I kill  him?  Haven't our elders  said that  no gift of land  or cow or food is greater  than  the 
gift of an assurance?” 
“You are  right m y lord. It is a  sin to kill  him who has y our word. But if  the cam el voluntaril y offers himself 
as food it  is no sin to accept  the offer. If he  does not volunteer,  you can kill anyone of us. Y ou are  hungry  and 
close  to your end. If we are  not of use to y ou at this ti me what value  have our lives? If any thing undesirable 
happens to  our lord, we will  imm olate ourselves.” 
“This seems  to be  more  reasonable,”  said the lion.  
The jackal  told the other two assistants, “F riends,  our lord is in a pitiab le condition.  There is now no one to  
protect  us from  others.  Instead  of ai mlessl y searching  the forest for food, let  us offer our bodies to hi m. That 
will deliver  us from  the burden of debt.  The servant  who is witness to the  helpless  death of his mast er will go 
to hell.”  
After  the jackal's plea,  all of them  called  on the  lion with  tears in their  eyes. “What's the m atter?  Did y ou find 
an anima l?” asked  the lion.  
“No, my lord. We searched  every  place,  every  inch  of the forest. We  are not  lucky . We found nothing. But  I 
request  the lord  to have  me for his mea l. That  will mean  two birds with one shot. The  lord will  survive  and I 
will go to heaven.  He who lay s down his life to  save his lord will  have no rebirth,”  said the crow. 
It was now the turn  of the jackal  to show his loy alty. He said, “ My friend, crow. Your bod y is too smal l to 
slake  the hunger  of m y lord. It  amounts  to starving him  and that  is a sin. Get out  of m y way. I have  to submit 
a plea to  my lord.”  
Addressing the lion,  the jackal  said, “Lord, I request  you to have me  for yo ur mea l and ensure  me a place  in 
heaven.  The lord has rights of life  and death  over his servants.  Therefore,  it is no sin in  exercising  his rights.” 
The leopard  intervened  and said,  “You jackal,  you are no great  personalit y. Let me plead  with the  lord.” 
Addressing Madotkata,  the leopard said,  “Oh lord, let  me give  away  my life to save yo ur life. Please perm it 
me to earn  a perman ent berth  in heaven.  My sacrifice  will win fame  for me  on earth.”  
All this set Kradanaka  thinking,  “All these  servants of the  lord have  said what they wanted to sa y. Still,  the 
lion did not  kill anyone of the m. Let me also offer to be  the lord's food today . I am sure m y friends  will support me.'  He then  turned  to the  leopard and  said, “ What  you have said  is right and  proper. But y ou are a 
carnivorous  anima l and belong to the  same  species  as the m aster  does. How can he kill  you? Let me offer 
myself.” 
The came l then  came  forward and requested  the lion  to have  him for that da y's mea l. At once,  the jackal  and 
the leopard  pounced on him  tore hi m to pieces  and all  of the m had a sumptuous  feast. 
As the stor y ended  Sanjeevaka  told Damanaka,  “Wicked  people  surround the king. Good men  should  not 
serve such mast ers. I will  need y our advice  to get  out of this  problem.”  
“The best course is to  leave  the countr y,” said Damanaka.  
“It is not wise to leave  when the  king is still  angr y. He can reach  me anywhere I go. The onl y alternative  I 
have  is to go to war with  the king.”  
Daman aka was afraid  that if San jeevaka  chose  to fight  Pingalaka  the lion  might  die and that  would be a 
disaster.  Let me persuade  the bullock  to leave  the forest, he  thought. 
“Going to war is all  right. But  how can  there  be a war between  a servant  and a king? If yo u underestim ate the 
strength  of yo ur enem y you will me et the same  fate as the  Sea me t at the hands of the  bird pair.”  
Curious, Sanjeeva asked,  “What  happened to  the birds?” 
10.The Bird Pair and The Sea 
Once upon a  time,  a pair  of pheasants lived  close  to the  Sea. They  spent  their ti me happil y singing and 
dancing  on the  branches of the  trees b y the Sea. One day  the femal e pheasant  told her husband that  she was 
expecting  their  baby  and he must  look for a safe place  to lay  the eggs. The husband said,  “My dear, this 
Seaside  is enchanting  and it  is better  you lay eggs here onl y.” 
The wife said, “When it  is full moon,  the Sea tide  can wash awa y even wild elephants.  Let us go elsewhere.”  
Amused,  the husband  said, “ What  you say is true. But  the Sea  has no po wer to  harm  us. Haven't y ou heard 
that there  is no fool who could  stop the flight  of a bird  or a fool who would enter  fire recklessl y. Will  anyone 
be brash enough  to challenge  Yama  (the Lord of Death)  to take  his life  if he can? You can la y your eggs here 
only.” 
Listening  to this dialogue,  the Sea thought,  “How vain  is this bird  which is as small  as a worm!  Let me drown 
these  eggs and see what he  can do.” After  laying eggs, the  fema le bird went in search  of food. In her absence,  the Sea sent  a wave that  sucked the 
eggs into  the waters.  The fema le returned to  the nest  and, not finding  the eggs there,  told the husband, "You  
are a fool. I told  you that the waves would wash away  the eggs. Those w ho do not  heed the  good word s of a 
friend  will perish like  the turtle  that fell  off the  stick.”  
“What's that  turtle  and what is that  stick?” asked the  husband. 
Once upon a  time  a turtle  called  Kambugriva  lived  in a pond. He had two swans, Sankat and Vikat,  as good 
friends.  Every  day they would mee t on the  rim of the  pond and discuss legends of y ore. They  would disperse 
with sunset.  That y ear there  were no rains and the  water in  the pond began  slowly  disappearing.  
Worried,  the swans told  the turtle,  “Friend,  What  will happen  to you? We are concerned.”  
“I appreciate  your interest  in me.  There is trouble  ahead.  Please find  a way  out of this  crisis. But it  is 
impor tant that we s hould  not give  in to despair.  According to  Manu, all good m en should come  to the  rescue 
of friends  and relatives  in times  of need.  Look for a  stick or a rope.  I will hang  on to it  as both  of yo u hold the 
two sides of the  stick or rope  and ferry  me to safet y.” 
“We shall  do a s you say,” the swan s said.  “But y ou have  to shut y our mouth.  Otherwise, yo u will crash to the 
ground.”  
On Kambugriva  agreeing  to the  plan, the  swans brought  a stick and  asked the turtle  to hold it  with his teeth. 
When  every thing was read y, the swans flew off with the  turtle  hanging  from  it. On the  way  people  saw this 
sight  and exclaim ed, “see, how clever  the birds are.” In tr ying to respond to  the people,  the turtle  opened his 
mouth  and fell  to the  ground and the  people  at once  killed  him.  
“The lesson is that  those who do not heed  the advice  of their  well- wishers me et their end  like the turtle.  Any 
day, the survivors are those  who foresee  a danger in  time  and those who deal  with it  when it  comes.  Those 
who leave  things to  fate and believe  in luck will  destroy  themse lves like Yadbhavishy a,” said the  female 
pheasant.  
“What happened  to Yadbhavish ya?” asked the  male bird. 
11.Tale of The Three Fish 
Three  fish lived  in a pond. Their nam es were Anagatavidhata,  Praty utpann amati and Yadbhavishy a. Some 
fisherm en passing b y the pond w ondered,  “Hey, we have never  seen this pond. It  seems  to be full  of fish. It is 
now evening.  Let us com e at dawn tomorrow  and bag  as many fish as we can.”  
Hearing  the fisherm an, Anagatavidhat a (the one who foresees a danger in  time) called  a meet ing of all  the fish and  told the m, “Haven't  you heard what the  fishermen  were say ing? We  must  move  out of this pond 
tonight  itself.  As the wise men  have said weak  men  should flee  when a strong man  invades or seek refuge  in 
a fort. There  is no alternative. ” 
“The fisherman  will come  tomorrow.  I think we should not  be here for even  a mo ment more, ” said 
Anagatavidhat a. 
“That's true. I endorse y our suggestion,”  said Prat yutpannam ati. “Let's go elsewhere.  Those who are afraid  of 
foreign  lands and those  who are  bound to their  soil will  die in their  own country . He who can prosper  
anywhere does not die  in his own land clinging  to sentimen t.” 
Loudl y laughing,  Yadbhavishy a said,  “Your plans  are not  good. Why  should  we leave  this pond, ancient 
home  of our forefathers,  because the  fishermen  have evil  intentions.  If it is destined,  we cannot  escape death 
even  if we go elsewhere.  Every thing is in the  hands of G od. You cannot  dispose what he proposes. Without  
his blessings people  will die even  if the y have protection.  With  his bles sings nobod y can kill them  even if 
they do not have  protection.  
Unable  to convince  him,  the other  two fish left  the pond. Coming  the next da y, the fisherm en took a  big catch 
of fish in  the pond. Yadbhavish ya was one a mong  them.  
The femal e pheasant  resumed,  “That  is w hy I told  you that those who foresee the  problem  and those who 
deal with the  problem  when it  arises are alwa ys victors  and those who trust their  luck  are the  losers.” 
Her husband asked, “In that case  do yo u think  I am  as stupid as that  Yadbhavish ya? Wait  and see what  I can 
do. I will  siphon off all  the water  in the  Sea and leave  him dry.” 
“Don't tr y to settle  scores with the  Sea. It will  do no good to y ou. A weak man's  anger  will hurt  him in the 
end.”  
“Don't discourage  me. Those who have  confidence  can confront stronger  men.  Doesn 't the lion  that is small 
in size slash the  crown of the migh ty elephant?  Doesn't a  small  wick  repel  darknes s? He who has courage  is 
the stronger person. See how I will  siphon off all  the water  in the  Sea and make  him dry,” said the  male. ” 
"But hundreds of rivers flow into the  sea. Your beak is ju st as big as a drop of the  sea. Ho w can  you consume 
all the water in  the Sea? Stop this tall  talk,”  advised  the female.  
“Not to despair is to  win the Goddess of Wealth.  I have an  iron beak. I will  toil day and night to  siphon of all 
the water.”  
The wife said, “O kay, if you want to engage  the Sea, call  all of your friends and  try to do the  job together. 
When  they  are united,  it is difficult  to defeat  even  a band of weak  men.  Even  blades of slender  gras s can  bind 
an elephant  if the y are woven into  a rope. Haven't  you heard the  story  of ho w a sparrow, a woodpecker,  a fly 
and a frog killed  an elephant?”  “Let m e know ho w the y did it,”  asked the  male pheasant.  
The wife began  telling  the story . 
 
12.The Elephant and The Sparrow 
Two sparrow s, husband and  wife, built  a nest on a  bany an tree where the  femal e sparrow laid  eggs. O ne 
afternoon  a wild  elephant  cam e to the tree  seeking shelter  from  the sun. Unable to  bear the  heat,  the tusker 
suddenl y went berserk and snapped a  big branch of the  tree,  crushing the  sparrow's eggs in the nest.  The 
sparrow pair somehow  escaped  the fury  of the elephant  but the  wife began cr ying for her eggs. 
A woodpecker, a  close friend  of the sparrow, heard her  crying and mov ed by her grief  asked her, “Why  are 
you crying, my friend? Wise men  do not grieve  what is lost  or w hat is dead or what  is past. That  is the 
difference  between a  learned  person and an unlettered  man.”  
The femal e sparrow said, “The wicked elephant  has destroy ed my offspring. If y ou are a true  friend of m ine 
suggest a wa y to kill him.  In m y view, he who harms  a person in  trouble  or he w ho ridicules  a person in 
sorrow deserves to be punished  and he who punishes s uch a person has no rebirth.”  
“What y ou say is right,”  said the  woodpecker. “He is a friend who comes  to yo ur aid when y ou are in need. 
Ever yone tries  to be friendl y when y ou are prospering.  You will see how resourceful  I am.  I have  a friend 
who is a fl y. With his help  we can kill  the elephant.”  
Taking  the femal e sparrow with him,  the woodpecker  called  on the  fly and told  him,  “This is m y dearest 
friend.  A wild elephant  has squashed her eggs. You must  somehow  find a  way  to kill  that elephant.  We need 
your help.”  
The fly said, “I have a friend  who is a frog. Let  us go to  him and seek his help also.”  The fe male  sparro w, the 
woodpecker  and the  fly went to the  frog and narrated  the entire  story of the  sparrow's grief. 
The frog said, “W hat is an elephant  before a united  crowd like  us? Do as I tell  you. O' fly, go to the elephant 
when the  sun is high  in the  sky and hum  a sweet tune  into his ears. When he closes  his ey es in ecstas y, the 
woodpecker  will scoop his e yes out. He becomes  blind  and thirst y and will  look for water.  I will go to  a 
quicksand  and begin  croaking there.  Thinking  that there  is water, the  elephant  will come  there  and sink into 
the quicksand and  die.” 
All the four pla yed out their  roles  according  to the  frog 's plan and  caused the  death  of the elephant.”  
At the  end of the  story , the fem ale pheasant told  her husband, “That is how together  the four friends killed 
the elephant.”  Impressed  by his wife's wisdom,  the husband  said, “Okay , we will  call our friends and with  their help  crush 
the Sea.' A s their  friends, the  cranes, the  peacocks,  the cuckoos and  other birds, gathered,  the male  pheasant 
told them  the stor y of how the  Sea had killed  their  offspring and  how necessar y it was to drain  him out. At 
the end, he said,  “We cannot  do this job. Let  us go to  Garuda, Lord Vishnu' s vehicle,  and tell  him all that has 
happened.  He will  be angry  over what  the Sea has done  to his species. He will  surely  take  revenge  on the 
Sea.”  
Wailing  and weeping, all  the birds went to  meet  Garuda and told  him,  “O lord,  we need y our help.  The Sea 
has destro yed the eggs of the  pheasant  pair. This is a  blow to all  the bird  comm unity. If you do not  intervene, 
he will destro y our entire  tribe.  Wise men  have alwa ys said that  one wicked person will  be an inspiration  to 
all others with  evil intentions.”  
Moved b y their  story of grief,  Garuda thought  to himself,  “These birds have  a legiti mate grievance.  I will  go 
and punish the Sea.' Meanwhile,  an envo y from  Lord Vishnu came  and told  Garuda that  the Lord  had sent 
him as He wanted to  travel  to Amarava thi on a divine  mission.  The envoy  asked Garuda to acco mpan y him at 
once.  
Garuda told  the envoy , “No, I cannot  come.  I am  not a  useful  servant. Let  him take  someone  else.  Please 
conve y my regards to  the Lord.”  
Surprised at  Garuda' s words, the envo y said, “O Garuda, yo u have never  uttered  such word s about  the Lord. 
Did the  Lord slight  you in an y manner? Let  me know.” 
“See, this Sea, the  Lord's habitat,  has swallowed the  eggs of the pheasant  pair.  If the Lord  does not  punish the 
Sea for this, I shall not  serve Him.  This  is m y decision  and yo u may convey  this to  the Lord,”  said Garuda. 
Informed  of Garuda' s pique,  Vishnu told himse lf, “Garuda  has reason to be anno yed with me.  I shall go 
myself and receive  him with respect.  If the  king is satisfied  he can  give onl y mone y. But when the  master 
honours his servant, the  servant  is ready  to sacrifice  his life  for the sake of the  master.  Therefore,  it is wise 
that I should visit  and appease  him.”  
When  Vishnu arrived  to meet  him,  Garuda  felt guilt y that he had said harsh word s about  the Lord and said, 
“O Lord,  the Sea who enjoy s your protection  has stolen the  eggs of m y servants and  thus insulted  me. 
Because  of respect  for yo u, I dela yed taking  action  against  him.”  
“True, learned  men  say that a master  is respon sible  for the  misdeeds  of his servants. Such m isdeeds  hurt the 
mast er more  than the  servant. Come  with me.  I shall recover  those eggs from  the Sea  and make  the pheasant 
pair happy  again.  Later  we will  go to Amarava thi,” said Lord Vishnu. 
The Lord then  took out his thunderbolt  and aim ing it at the  Sea warned hi m, “You wicked m an, return  the 
eggs to  the bird pair.  Otherwise, I will  turn the  sea into  a desert.”  
Frightened,  the Sea returned  the eggs to  the pheasants.  The ma le bird handed the m to his wife.  “From this story ,” Damanak a told Sanjeevaka,  “it is evident  that he who challenges  an enem y without 
knowing his strength  perishes in the  end.” 
“True, but how do I know that  Pingalaka  has evil  designs against me?  We have been  very  friendl y. That 
makes it difficul t for me  think of killing  him,”  said Sanjeevaka.  
Daman aka said,  “He stares at y ou in anger if  he has evil  thoughts in his m ind. Otherwise, y ou may safely 
think  he is the  same  old affectionate  friend. But  if you decide  to leave  the place  do it  after  sunset.  Our elders 
have  said that  one must  sacrifice  an individual  for the good of the  comm unity, give  up caste  for the good of 
the village  and surrender  a village  for the good of the  country . It is desirable  to save mone y so that  one can 
spend it  in a crisis,  spend  mone y to save his wife and give  up both his wealth  and wife to  save himself. ” 
After  he gave this  advice  to Sanjeevaka, Daman aka went  to see Karataka.  Hailing  him,  Karataka  said, “W hat 
happened  to your mission?” 
“I have ju st finished  sowing  the seeds of discord among  the two friends. The rest  is in the hands of God,”  
said Damanaka.  
“Let m e know ho w you did it.” 
“I have carried  tales  from  one to the other  and succeeded  in dividing  the friends. You will  not see the m again 
together.”  
“Oh, you have  not done an ything good. You have separated  two good friends.  You have  made  them  hate 
each other.  A wicked  person kno ws onl y to harm  but not mend.”  
“You do not  know politic al science.  However strong y ou are, unless yo u kill the ene my or the  disease at  the 
very outset, y our enem y or the  disease will  kill you in the  end. San jeevaka  stole  the m inistership  from  us and 
so he is our ene my. I won the king's assurance for him  and brought  him to the court  of the king.  Today , he 
has ousted us from  our office.  That  is why  I have plans  to kill  him.  If he wants to save himse lf, he should 
leave  this place.  Wise men,  like Chaturaka,  do no hesitate  to torment  others to achieve  their  goal. Fools like 
the lion cannot enjo y even  what they  have  won.” 
On Karataka's request,  Damanaka  began telling  that story . 
 
13.The Lion and The Jackal 
Vajradanstra was a lion  living  in a forest.  He had two friends, a jackal  named  Chaturaka  and a wolf nam ed 
Kravy amukha. Because  of their  friendship with  the lion,  the jackal  and the  wolf had a free  run of the forest. 
One da y the lion found a fema le camel separated  from  its caravan  and in labour  pains. The lion  killed  the 
camel and found a live  baby camel inside her  womb.  The lion  and his friends fed  on the dead  came l but 
spared the  baby. The lion adopted  the baby  and brought  him home.  The lion told  the baby  cam el, “You are  now my child.  Nobod y can harm  you. You can  freely  roam about  the 
forest  and have a  nice ti me. You have  ears which look  like a  pair of conches.  So I will  call you 
Sankhukarna.”  
As day s passed, Sankhukarna  becam e a young and energetic  animal. He wa s alwa ys to be seen in  the 
comp any of Vaj radanstra.  One da y the lion had to confront  a wild elephant  and in the  fight  the elephant  badly 
injured the  lion.  Now the lion  was too weak to  go out and hunt. He called  his friends, the  jackal  and the  wolf, 
and the cam el and told the m, “Look for an ani mal. I will kill  it and all  of us can have  a good mea l.” 
The three  scoured the entire  forest but could  not find an  anima l. In despair,  the jackal  thought, “If we can kill  
this came l we will  have a sure me al for several  days. But he  is a favorite  of our king. He will  not agree  to kill 
the came l. Yet with m y cunning  I will see  that the lion  kills hi m. The learned  have said there  is nothing 
impossibl e or forbidden  for an intellig ent being.” 
The jackal  told the camel,  “O Sankhukarna, our lord  has been without  food for a long ti me and he ma y die of 
hunger.  His death  will mean  a disaster for all  of us. I have a  plan to  get over this  problem.  Listen.”  
“Go ahead.  Let me know what y ou have  in mind.  I shall certain ly do whatever  I can for the  lord because  if 
we do good to  our master  we will  reap a  reward hundred ti mes more  valuable  than  what we gave to  the 
mast er,” said the ca mel. 
Chaturaka,  the jackal said,  “O yo ung came l, offer y our body to the lord  at the  double the  profit.  Your bod y 
also will grow in size  and the  lord also will  continue  to live.”  
The came l replied,  “I am  read y. Let the lord  know that  he can  have m y body  provided the  Lord of Duty  is a 
witness to  my sacrifice.”  
The jackal,  the wolf and the  came l then  called  on the  lion to  inform  him of the  came l's decision.  The jackal 
told the lion, “We searched  the entire  forest  without sighting  even a  small  anima l. It is alread y sunset now. 
The came l is prepared  to offer  his body  if yo u are read y to increase  the size of his bod y and invite  the Lord  of 
Duty  to be a witness.” 
On the  lion agreeing  to the proposal, the  jackal  and the wolf at  once pounced  on the  camel  and tore  him to 
pieces.  
Vajradanstra, the  lion,  told the  jackal, “I am  going  to the river  to take  a bath  and worship the  deities.  Till I 
come back,  keep an e ye on this food.' The m inute  the lion  left the scene,  the jackal  thought  of a plan to  have 
the came l all to himself.  He told  Kravy amukha, the wolf, “Y ou seem  to be ver y hungry . Go ahead  and feast 
on the  came l meat. When  the lion  comes  I shall convince  him about  your innocence.”  
As the wolf started  to taste  the meat,  the jackal  alerted  him and told  him that the lord  was com ing and to  allay 
any suspicion  he should stop eating  and leave  the place.  When  the lion  came,  he saw that  the heart  of the 
camel was missing.  Angril y, the lion roared  and said, “Who is the culprit,  I will  kill him. ” The wolf then looked  at the jackal  suggesting  that the jackal  should convince  the lion of his innocence.  But 
the cunning jackal  said, “Y ou did not  heed m y warning and ate  the meat.  Why  do yo u now expect  me to help 
you?' Realizing  the danger,  the wolf fled the  scene to save  his life.  
Meanwhile,  a caravan  of ca mels  passing b y stopped  where the lion  and the  jackal  were planning  the next 
move.  The lead  camel had a big bell  tied to his neck. Frightened  by the sound of the  bell,  the lion  asked the 
jackal  to find out  what the sound was all  about. He had  not heard such sounds in his life.  Pretending  to find 
out, the jackal  went out of the  lion's sight and shouted  from  there,  “O lord, run for y our life."  
“What's the ma tter,”  the lion asked hi m. “Why are you frightening  me?  Let me know clearl y what's 
happening.”  
The jackal  said,  “My lord,  the Lord  of Death is angr y that you have  killed  the came l before  its death  was due. 
He is upset and  vowed that he w ould get from  you one thousand ti mes more  than the  value  of the ca mel we 
have  killed.  It is the  Lord of Death  who hung a  bell in the  lead ca mel's  neck.  He also brought with hi m all the 
ancestors  of the ca mel.”  
The jackal  thus tricked  the lion into hurriedl y fleeing  the place,  leaving  the came l's body  all to himself  to 
feast  upon. 
Daman aka continued,  “That  is w hy I told  you that a wise man  protects his interest  even if it  is to tor ment 
others  and never shares his secrets  with others as Chaturaka,  the jackal  did in the above  story .” 
Sanjeevaka  began pondering,  “Why did I do like this.  A vegetari an serving a  meat  eater!  What  shall I do and 
where shall  I go?  Perhaps, Pingalaka  may spare me  because he  had given me  assurance. Trouble  may 
somet imes come to people who walk the  path  of ethical  conduct.  Ever y living  being does good and  
somet imes bad deeds. He will reap  the consequences  in the  next  birth. So, we cannot  escape what  fate has in 
store  for u s.” 
With  these  thoughts on his mind  Sanjeevaka  went to  see Pingalaka,  the lion, and sat  down without  greeting 
him. The lion  also was surprised at the  bullock's arrogance  and,  believing  what Daman aka had told him  about 
Sanjeevaka,  pounced on him  tearing  him with his claws. Sanjeevaka  too began goring  the lion  with his horns. 
Seeing  that the jackal  and the  lion were  determ ined to fight to  the end, Karataka  admonished  Daman aka, 
“You fool!  You have  created  a rift  between  the two friends.  If the lord dies,  how can  you be a m inister?  How 
do you aspire  to be a  minister  when yo u do not know the principles  of diploma cy? War  mongers  like you can 
never  reach  their goals.  You should not  use force where there  is still  room  for peace.  One of the  two is bound 
to die. Save the  situation  if you can. No, it is m y folly  to tell you what is good and  what is bad. Elders  have 
said that one  should  not preach  to one who is not a  disciple.  You have  the example  of the  bird Suchimukha. ” 
“I am  eager  to know what it  is,” said Daman aka. 14.Suchim ukha and The Monke y 
A gang of monke ys made their  home  in a moun tain slope. When winter  came,  it brought not onl y severe cold 
but also heavy  rains.  Unable  to stand  the cold,  the monk eys collected  red berries wildl y growing in the 
mount ain slope. They  gathered  around  the berries  and began blowing  air at  them  thinking  they  were  embers.  
Watching  their  vain effort  in amuse ment, Suchi mukha,  a bird, told  them,  “You fool,  they  are not emb ers but 
red berries. Wh y do y ou waste y our energ y on them?  This will  not save y ou from  cold. Go and look  for a 
shelter  in a cave or a  place  free from  wind. The clouds are  thick  and there  will be no imm ediate relief  from 
rain.”  
An old me mber of the  monke y gang angril y told the  bird, “Why  do yo u poke y our nose in our affairs? Go  
away. Haven't  the elders  said that  he who cherishes his welfare  should not talk  to a gambler  or an inefficien t 
workman.  So is the  person a fool who talks  to an idiot  or a pleasure  seeker.”  
Disregarding  the old  monke y's anger and not  giving room  to an y other  monke y to talk,  Suchimukha  went on 
repeating  his advice  to the m to seek  shelter  elsewhere.  Tired  with the  bird' s unwanted  advice,  one of the 
monke ys sprang at  the bird and bashed hi m against  a rock till  he was dead. 
Karataka  said at the  end of the  story , “If yo u counsel a  fool it  will onl y provoke him  and not pacif y. If yo u 
feed milk  to a snake  it will  increase  its store of poison. That's  why you should not  offer advice  to ever yone. 
Look,  how two good sparrows lost their  home,  all due to a foolish monk ey.” 
At Daman aka's  request, Karataka  began  telling  the story  of the evil  monke y. 
 
15.How a Sparro w Ca me to Grief  
A pair  of sparrows made  their  home  on a branch  of a big tree  and lived happil y there.  Soon it  was winter  and 
it began to  rain heavil y. Frequent  gusts of wind made  the cold  unbearable.  At this ti me, a monke y comple tely 
drenched  in the  rain and s hivering  from  cold, ca me scurr ying to the  tree for cover.  
Seeing  the condition  of the monke y, the fe male  sparro w said,  “Gentlem an, with  your feet and hands yo u 
seem  to be a  human  being.  Why  didn't y ou build  a house for y ourself?' Angered b y this uncalled  for advice, 
the monke y said,  “you  stupid, why  do not y ou shut up and  mind  your business ?' The monke y told hi mself, 
“My, what i mpudence!  This bit  of a creature  has the  cheek  to offer me  advice.  Makes fun of me. 
Unnecessary  prattle.  I must  teach  her a  lesson. Why  shouldn't  I kill  her?” 
Turning  to the  femal e, the monke y said,  “How does it  help y ou to worry about  my plight? Haven't  you heard 
this saying of the elders  that you should offer advice  to those w ho seek  it and  cherish it? Advice to  him who is indifferent  is like  a cry  in the wilderness. Don't try  to do that.”  
When  the fem ale persisted, the  monke y climbed  up the tree  and broke up the nest  of the sparrow pair. 
“That's w hy,” said Karataka  to Damanak a, “you should be  careful  in offering  advice.  You are  a fool  who 
does not  under stand  the essence  of m y advice.  That  is not  your mistake.  Fools ignore  advice  and wise men 
follow  it and  benefit  by it. It  is clear  that you haven't heard  the stor y of Dharmabuddh i and his son 
Papabuddhi,  the stor y of how the  father  was killed  by smoke  due to the  son's thoughtlessness.” 
“Why  don't you tell me that stor y,” asked Damanaka.  
In a city in the north,  lived  two friends named  Dharm abuddhi  and Papabuddhi. One da y, Papa thought, “I am  
a man  without  worldl y wisdom  and added  to that  I am  also poor. Let  me persuade  Dharma  to take  me to far 
off lands  and earn lots  of mone y through  his bu siness skills. Later  I will deprive  him of all  his wealth  and live 
happil y ever  after.”  
With  these  plans on his mind,  Papa told Dharma,  “My friend, y ou are growing old and  cannot man age your 
business. Unles s you go out  into the  wide world how can y ou tell your children  about the  wonders of the 
world ? Elders  have  said that he is born in vain  who doe s not  see the  countries in  the world, learn  several 
languages  and know the  dress styles of other  people.  You cannot  earn  wealth  and knowledge without  wide 
travel.”  
Dharma  liked  this advice  and taking  the blessings of his teachers  set out on overseas travel,  taking  Papa with 
him. Both of the m earned  a lot  of mone y abroad  due to  the business talent  of Dharma.  It was time  for them  to 
return  home  because  it is natural  for people  who go abroad  in search  of wealth  and learning  to think  of home 
when the y have achieved  both. 
As they  were entering  their native  place,  Papa told  Dharm a, “It is not safe to  take home  all this wealth 
because  relatives  and friends in need  will seek  help if the y know about our riches.  We shall  bury  most  of our 
mone y in some  secret  place  in this forest. Whenever  we need  mone y, we can  come  here  and take  whatever 
we need.  You know that  mone y tempts  even  saints.” 
Dharma  agreed  to Papa' s plan  and went  home  after  both of the m dug a pit  and covered  it after  bury ing most 
of their  earnings  in it.  One midnight  Papa went to  the secret  place  in the forest and  stole all  the mone y and 
brought  it home.  Next morning,  he went to  Dharm a and suggested  that the y should go to the  forest because 
he was in need  of mone y. 
When  both of them  arrived  at the  secret  spot in the  forest and dug there,  they found the pit  empt y. At once 
Papa  began shouting loudl y, “Dharma,  you stole the  mone y and nobody  else. The  pit was carefull y covered. 
You must  give  me half of what we have  buried here.' Though  Dharm a denied  it, Papa insisted  that the y 
should take  the dispute to  a court of law.  
When  the case  came  before the  court, the  judge asked them  to take  oath  in the na me of God. But Papa  quoted 
experts  as say ing that relevant  docum ents should be produced  first as proof, then  witnesses w ould be summ oned  to give  evidence  and oath  in the  name  of G od is taken  when neither  docum ents nor witnesses are 
availab le. 
"I can  produce the  gods of the forest as witnesses. The y will deter mine who is guilt y and who is innocent,”  
said Papa. Impressed  by this plan,  the judges asked both the  parties  to be present  next morn ing at the forest 
for a hearing. Happ y at the judges ' order,  Papa went home  and told  his father,  “Father, I have  stolen all 
Dharma's  mone y. There is a  case in the  court  that I can win onl y with  your help. Otherwise, m y life will be  in 
danger.”  
“What have  I to do to get  that mone y, son,” asked  his father. 
“There is a  big tree  there.  You have  to go now and hide  in the hollow  of that  tree.  Tomorrow  morning  when 
the judges and others  assemb le there,  I will  ask yo u to tell  the truth.  Then it  is yo ur turn to  declare  that 
Dharma  is the thief,”  said the son. 
The father  left at once  for the forest to  hide in  the hollow  of the tree.  The morning  of the  next da y, the son 
took a bath and  went to the  tree taking  Dharm a and the  judges with  him.  Papa  went near the  tree and shouted, 
“O sun, moon,  air, fire, earth,  water,  the God of Death, da y and night,  you are all  witnesses to the  history  of 
human ity. O Goddes s of the  Forest, declare  who among  us is guilt y.” 
The father  shouted  back from  inside the  hollow of the  tree,  “Listen  all of yo u, it is Dharma  who stole the 
mone y.” The judges and the  king' s men heard  the verdict  and sat down to  decide  what punishmen t they 
should give  Dharma.  Meanwhile,  Dharma  filled  the hollow  with rags and ha y, poured oil on the m and threw 
a matchst ick into it. The fire  forced the  half-burnt  father  to come  out of the  tree. 
“All this is the  work of Papa's evil  mind,”  said the  father  and s oon collapsed  and died. The  king's men  at once 
bound Papa  hand and foot and  hung him  to a tree.  They  said, “O ur elders  have alwa ys said that wise men 
should not  only  be resourceful  but also  know the  consequences of being  resourceful.  You have  the stor y of 
how a mongoose  killed  all the offspring of the  crane  before his own ey es.” 
When  Dharm a asked the m to tell the stor y, the king's men  began  relating  the story . 
16.The F oolish  Crane and The Mongoose 
A big ban yan tree was home  to a number  of cranes in  a forest. In the  hollow of that  tree lived  a cobra,  which 
used to  feed on the  young cranes which did  not ye t learn to  fly. When the  mother  crane  saw the  cobra killing 
her offspring,  she began  crying. Seeing the  sorrowing crane,  a crab  asked her what  made  her cry. 
The crane  told the  crab, “Every  day, the cobra living  in this tree  is killing  my children.  I am  not able  to 
contain  my grief. Please  show me  some way  to get  rid of this  cobra.” The crab then  thought,  “These cranes  are our born enem ies. I shall  give her  advice  that is mislead ing and 
suicidal.  That  will see the  end of all  these cranes.  Elders have  alway s said that  if you want to wipe out  your 
enemy your word s should be  soft like butter  and yo ur heart  like a stone. 
Then  the crab  told the crane,  “Uncle,  strew pieces of me at from  the mongoose's  burrow to the  hollow of the 
cobra.  The mongoose  will follow  the trail  of me at to the cobra  burrow and will  kill it.” 
The crane  did as the crab  advised her.  The mongoose  came following  the meat  trail and killed  not only  the 
cobra  but also all  the cranes on the  tree.  “That is w hy,” the king's men  said, “if you have  a strateg y, you must 
also know what the  strateg y would lead  to. Papabuddhi  considered onl y the crooked  plan but  not what would 
follow.  He reaped the  consequences.”  
Karataka  told Damanaka,  “That's wh y like Papabuddhi  you haven't foreseen what  will happen  if you went 
ahead  with y our plans.  You have  an evil  mind.  I knew it from  your plans to endanger  the life  of our lord. 
Your place  is not with  us. If a  rat had a  1000-pound scale for its  lunch, is it  any wonder that  a kite  carried 
away a child?” 
“What about  it,” asked Damanaka.  Karataka  told him the following  story . 
Jeernadhana  was the son of a rich  merchan t. But he had lost all  his wealth.  He thought  he should go abroad,  
for, he  told himse lf that he who had once  prospered  should not live  in the  same  place  as a poor man.  People 
who respected  him once would now look down upon him  and shun hi m. Deciding  to go abroad  to seek his 
fortune,  he mortg aged  with  a local  merch ant the 1000-pound balance  his ancestors  had left  behind.  
He went abroad  with the  mone y the merch ant gave  him and after  several y ears came  home  and asked the 
merchant  to return  him the balance.  
The merchan t said, “O  my, where is the balance?  The rats  have gnawed at  it for food.” 
Jeernadhana  replied  without  emot ion, “I cannot bla me you for w hat the rats  have done. The  world is like  that. 
Nothing  reall y is permanen t. Any  way , I am  going  to the  river to  take the  purificator y bath.  Please  send with 
me your son D hanadeva  to look after  my needs.” 
Afraid  that Jeernadeva  would accuse  him of theft,  the mer chant  called  his son and told  him,  “Son, y our uncle 
is going  to the  river for a bath.  You accompan y him taking  with yo u all the things  he needs to take  his bath. 
Men offer help  not onl y out of kindness but also  out of fear, greed  etc. If one offers help for reasons other  
than this, y ou have  to be war y of such a person.”  
The merchan t's son followed  Jeernadeva  to the  river. After taking  bath,  he led  the bo y into a nearb y cave  and, 
pushing the  boy inside, closed  it with a huge boulder.  When Jeernadeva  returned  from  the river,  the mer chant 
asked hi m, “O honoured guest,  didn't yo u bring back  my son? Where  is he ? Please tell  me.”  
Jeernadeva  told him,  “A kite has carried  away your boy. There was nothing  I could do.” “You cheat,  is this  possible? Ho w can  a kite  carry away a boy ? Bring m y boy back. Otherwise, I will  go to 
the king and co mplain. ” 
“Yes, ju st as a kite cannot carr y away  a bo y, rats also cannot  eat away heavy  iron balance.  If yo u want y our 
boy, give  me back  my balance,”  said Jeernadeva.  
Both  of them  took the dispute  to the  king's court. The  merchan t comp lained  to the  judges that  Jeernadeva  had 
kidnapped  his child.  The judges ordered hi m to return  the boy to the m erchant.  Jeernadeva  told the  judges the 
entire  story. Thereupon,  the judges ordered  Jeernadeva  to return the  boy and the  merchan t to give back  the 
balance  to Jeernadeva.  
Karataka  then  told Damanaka,  “You have  done this  foul deed because  you were jealous of the  king' s 
friendship  with Sanjeevaka.  It is not without  reason that  our elders  have said:  
“Fools hate  the learned
The poor blame  the rich
The miser  riles  the giver
The wicked abhor  the virtuous”  
“You have  tried  to help  us. But  you have hurt us. It is like  the well-m eaning  monke y killing  the king,”  said 
Karataka.  
“What did  the monke y do?” asked Daman aka. 
17.The King and The Foolish  Monke y 
Once upon a  time,  there  was a king who kept a monk ey as a pet.  The monke y served the  king in whatever 
way he could.  He had a free  run of the  royal household because  he was the king’s pet.  One hot da y the 
monke y sat fanning  by the side  of the king who was sleeping.  He noticed  a fly  on the  chest of the  king and 
tried to swish it  away. The fl y would go a way for the mo ment and come  back again  to sit  on the king's chest. 
The monke y could  take  it no longer  and decided  to teach  the fl y a lesson. He looked for a  dagger to kill  it and 
when he found it  brought it  down with all  force  on the fl y. The fly flew  away but the  king died  as result  of 
the dagger blow delivered  by the monke y. 
Karataka  said,  “Therefore,  the lesson is that  a king  who cares  for his life  should  not have  a fool as his 
servant.’  He went on to relate  a second stor y to show ho w shrewd people  save the  lives of others. 
Once upon a  time  a Brahm in lived  in a big cit y and as a result  of his misdeeds  in his previous birth  he 
became a thief.  He sa w four other  Brahmins  from  another  city selling  a variet y of goods in his cit y. He thought  he should somehow  deprive  the four Brahmins  of their  mone y and through sweet words become  their 
good friend.  He wa s useful  to them  in whatever  way  he could.  True, it  comes  naturall y for women  of vice  to 
act coy and for charlatans  to pretend  to be  learned.  
The four visitors sold all  their  goods and with the  mone y from  the sales bought  pearls and  precious je wels. 
The Brahmin  thief  was keeping  an e ye on w hat they were doing even  as he pretended  to serve the m 
faithfull y. One day , in the  presence  of the Brahm in, the traders cut  open their  thighs and  storing the jewels 
and pearls inside  the thighs  sewed the m back.  
The Brahmin  was disappointed  that they did not  give him  even a  small  part of their  wealth.  He imm ediately 
decided  to follow them  and kill  them in the  midd le of their  journey  back home  and take  all that wealth  from 
them. 
He told  the traders  with tears  in his e yes, “Friends,  you seem to be  ready  to leave  me behind.  My heart  is 
broken  because it  is difficult  for m e to snap the  bonds of friendship with y ou. If you will be so kind as to  take 
me with y ou, I will  be ver y grateful  to yo u.” 
Moved b y his request,  the traders  started  their  homeward  journey accomp anied  by the Brahm in thief.  They 
passed through several  villages,  towns and cities  before  they reached  a village  inhabited  by thugs. Suddenly , 
they heard a  group of crow s loudl y shouting, “Y ou thugs, ver y rich people  are com ing. Come,  kill them  and 
beco me rich.”  
The thugs at once  attacked  the Brahm in traders  with sticks and began  exam ining  their  bags. But  they  found 
nothing.  They  were  surprised  because this  was the  first ti me that the words of the  crow s turned  out to  be 
false.  They  told the traders, “O  traders, the  crows alway s tell the truth. You have the  mone y with yo u 
somewhere.  Take it  out or we will  cut every  limb of yours and bring it  out.”  
The Brahmin  thief  pondered, “These thugs will certain ly pierce  the body  of the traders  to grab  the je wels.  My 
turn also will  come.  It is better  I offer m yself to these  thugs and save the  lives of the  Brahmins.  There  is no 
point  in fearing  death  because  it will  come  today  or after  hundred y ears. One cannot escape  it.” 
With  these  thoughts on his mind,  the Brahm in thief  asked the  thugs to first kill  him and see  if there  was 
anything valuable  on his body . The thugs accepted  the offer  and found nothing on hi m after  they pierced  his 
body. They let go the other  four Brahmins  thinking  that they also did  not have an ything precious  on their 
bodies.  
As Karataka  and Damanaka  were discussing the  ways of the  world, Sanjeevaka  engaged  Pingalaka  in a short 
battle  in which Pingalaka  clawed him  to death.  But the  lion was immediately struck b y remorse  and, recalling 
the good day s he had spent  with the bullock,  began  repenting:  
“O I have  comm itted a great  sin by  killing  my friend. There  cannot  be a greater  sin than  killing  a trusted 
friend.  They  who forget  a favour or breach  a trust or let  down a friend  will all go to  hell as long as the sun 
and the moon  shine  in the  sky. A king will  perish whether  what he loses is his kingdom  or a faithful  servant. 
A servant and  a kingdom  are not the  same  because y ou can alway s win back the  kingdom  but not a  trusted 
servant.  In the court,  I have alwa ys praised Pingalaka.  How can I explain  his death  to the  courtiers?” Daman aka approached  the grief-stricken  king  and told  him,  “O lord, ruing  the death  of a grass eater  is 
cowardice.  It is not good for a king  like y ou. The learned  have  alway s said that  it is not a sin to kill  a person 
for treason  even if  that person is a  father,  brother, son, wife or a friend.  Simil arly, one must  abandon  a tender-
hearted  king,  a Brahmin  who eats all  kinds of food, an im modest woman,  a wicked assistant,  a disobedient 
servant  and an ungrateful  person.”  
Daman aka continued,  “You are  mourning  the death  of someone  who does not deserve  sympathy. Though  you 
are talking  like a learned  man,  you forget that  learned  men do not think  of the  past or the dead.”  
These  words of Damanak a worked like  a tonic  providing  relief  to Pingalaka’s  troubled  mind.  Pleased with 
this advice,  the lion  king reappointed  Damanaka  as his minister  and continued  to rule the  forest. 
Second Strategy: Gaining  Friends 
This is the  second st rategy  of Panchatantra  known a s Gaining  Friends beginning  with  this stanza: 
Even  without  the wherewithal
Learned men and intelle ctuals
Achieve  what  they  want like
The crow, the rat, the  deer and the  turtle. 
Now the story. There  was a cit y called  Mahilarop yam in the  south not far  off from  where was a large  bany an 
tree. Man y species of birds ca me there to  eat the tree’s  fruit. In the  hollow of the  great  tree lived  poisonous 
reptiles  like snakes and scorpions. Travelers  found the  tree a great  shelter  in their  journe ys. 
A crow called  Laghupatanak a mad e this tree  his home.  As he was fly ing one day  towards the  city for 
collec ting food, he  sighted a hunter  carrying a net  and approaching  the tree like  a messenger  of death.  The 
crow at  once sensed danger  and, sure that  the hunter  came  to trap  the birds on the  tree,  told all the  birds, 
“Friends,  this wicked hunter  have seeds in  his bag that  he will  scatter  to lure  you. don’t trust him  and avoid 
the seeds like  poison.” The hunter  cam e, sowed the seeds and spread the  net. He left the  spot and sat 
elsewhere  not to  arouse the suspicion  of the birds. Warned  by Laghupatanaka,  the birds sta yed away  from  the 
seeds as though the y were poisonous berries. 
Meanwhile,  Chitragriva,  king of doves, sa w the  seeds from  a distance  and landed  there with  his retinue  of 
one thousand doves. They  came to eat the  seeds ignoring  the warnings of Laghupatanaka  and soon the hunter  
spread his net  and trapped  all of them.  That  is w hy elders  have said  that fools can never  foresee peril.  People 
often  lose sense when danger lurks in  the corner.  Chitragriva  and his retinue,  however, kept  their  cool in  the face  of danger.  He appealed  to his friends not  to 
panic.  Elders  have said that  they tide over dangers, who are not  scared b y crisis. “Let  us fly together  and land 
elsewhere  where the  hunter cannot  reach  us. We can then  plan  a strateg y to get  out of this net.  If we don’t fl y 
now, we are all  doomed, ” said Chitragriva.  Thereupon,  all of them  flew  together.  
The hunter followed  the flight  of the doves and looking  upwards chanted,  “They are flying together.  But the 
moment there is a  break in their  unity they will crash to  the ground.”  Laghupatanaka,  the crow, also followed  
the flying dove s to see what the y would do. When he lost  sight of the  birds, the hunter  gave up and  went 
home  ruing that  he had  lost his net  also. 
When  he was s ure that  the hunter  had failed  to chase  them,  the king  of the doves told  his friends, “ The hunter 
has disappeared.  Let us all  now fly towards Mahilaropy am where I have  a friend  Hirany aka, who is a rat.  He 
is our onl y hope. It is onl y a friend who will  come  to the aid  of those in  trouble.”  The birds, heeding  the 
advice  of the  king, flew  to the fort  of Hirany aka in Mahilarop yam. 
Standing  outside  the fort, Chitragriva  shouted, 
“O friend,  come  quickl y. We are in  great  trouble.”  
Without  coming  out, Hirany aka shouted  back, “Who are y ou sir and what  do yo u want from  me?  What  is the 
kind of trouble  that is bothering  you? Let m e know.” 
“I am  your friend  Chitragriva,  king  of the doves. Come  out soon.” 
Hiran yaka cam e out and  was happ y to see Chitragriva  with his retinue  and asked what  the ma tter was. The 
king of the doves said, 
“Whatever  man  does for whatever  reasons,
in whatever  mann er and wherever  in his last  birth.
He reaps the  consequences  for the same  reason s,
in the same  manner  and in the  same  place.”  
“All of us are trapped  in this  net because  of our weakness for food. Come  at once and free  us from  this trap,” 
urged  Chitragriva.  
Hiran yaka said, “It is rightl y said that  a bird  can recognize  food from  fifty  miles but cannot  see the danger 
lurking  next  to him.”  
After  delivering  this sermon,  the rat  set out to  free Chitragriva  first. But the  king of doves pleaded  with  him 
to first liberate  his friends. The rat  was angry  and rem inded  Chitragriva  that it was fair  that the  king beca me 
free first and then  the servants.  “No, it is not  like that,”  countered  Chitragriva.  “They  are all dedicat ed to m y 
service  and have  left their  famil ies behind  to come  with me.  I have to  repay  that debt,”  he said. Pleased  with his friend’s love  for his servants, Hiran yaka said, “F riend,  I kno w the  duties of a  king. I was 
only testing  you. I will free  every one now. This will  win more  doves for yo ur retinue.”  With  the help  of his 
servants, the  rat then bit  off the entire  net and all  the doves came  out. Hiran yaka saw off Chitragriva  and 
retinue  and went back into  his fort. 
Seeing  the whole  drama  of Hirany aka liberat ing Chitragriva  and his friends, Laghupatanak a, the crow, 
thought,  “I don’t trust  anyone. On top of it,  I have a  fickle  mind.  I will seek his friendship.  Our ancestors 
have  alway s said that  even  if a wise man  has every thing he needs, he should still  seek  friends. Even if  all the 
rivers  flow into the  Sea, the  Sea still  waits for the  Moon to  come  out.” 
1.The Cro w-Rat Discourse  
After  he sa w how Hiran yaka had helped  Chitragriva,  Lagupatan aka came down from  his tree  perch  and 
called  out the  rat in  a voice  resembling  that of Chitragriva.  The rat thought,  “What  happened? Did I forget to  
free any bird? The dove king  must  be calling  me for the  same  purpose.”  
Not sure who wa s calling  him,  the rat  shouted  from  inside  his fort, “Who are y ou?”  
“I am  Laghupatanak a, the crow.” 
The rat further  retreated  into his fort  and said, “G o away  at once, I don’t  know who yo u are.”  
“I have come  on an impor tant business. Wh y don’t  you meet  me?”  
“What do I gain  by mee ting you?”  
“Sir, I have seen y ou liberat ing Chitragriva  and his retinue.  I thought  friendship with  you would be useful in 
such a crisis.  I am  seeking  your hand.” 
“Very odd! You are  the diner  and I am  the dinner.  How can  there be  amit y between  the two?  Where  there  is 
enmity, there cannot  be friendship.  Didn’t y ou hear  the elders  say: 
Friendship  or marriag e is alwa ys
between  equals  in caste  and wealth.
There  cannot  be an y sort of bond
between  the weak and the  strong. 
“He who seeks friendship  with someone  who is not an  equal will  earn  ridicule.  So, please  go.” The crow replied,  “Hiran yaka, I am  waiting  here  at your doorstep.  If yo u reject my hand, I will starve  here to 
death.”  
“But friendship with  you is not pos sible.  However hot  the water,  it still  kills  the fire.” 
“We haven’t  even seen each  other.  How can  there be  enmit y between  both of us ?” 
Hiran yaka then  explained,  “Enmit y is of two kinds. The first is natural  and the second  is artificia l. The 
second kind  disappears when what caused  it disappears.  But natural  enm ity ends only  with the  death  of one 
of the  two enem ies.” 
“Can yo u make  it clearer,  asked Laghupatanaka.  
“Yes, artifici al enmit y is alway s based on some  reason.  Natural  enm ity is like  the one between  a snake  and a 
mongoose,  water and fire,  Devatas and  Rakshasas, dogs and cats,  the rich  and the  poor, the learned  and the 
illiterate, between  women of virtue  and vice.”  
The crow then pleaded,  “Sir, w hat you say is unreasonable.  There  is alway s a reason behind  friendship and 
enmity. That is wh y a wise man  should  alway s seek friendship  and not enm ity.” 
“True, it  is foolish to think  that you will not come  to harm  because y ou are a man  of character.  People  who 
are blinded  by ignorance  and anger  do not consider y our character, ” said the  rat. 
“Friendship  with bad m en is like  a pot  of clay  easy to break but  difficult  to rejoin. With good m en it is like 
pot of gold, difficult  to break but  easy  to mend.  I pledge  that you will have  no reason to fear  danger from 
me,” said the  crow. 
Hiran yaka said, “I have no faith  in pledges.  don’t trust an  enem y with  whom you have mad e peace.  Even  if 
the hole is sma ll, water  seeping through  it can  sink a ship. 
don’t  trust a person untrustworth y
Faith  has its own lim its
The evil that trust brings
Leaves  you totall y destroy ed
Him who is highl y skeptical
The might y cannot  put an end to
Him who trusts others  easily
Even  the weakest  can kill.  
After  this long sermon,  Laghupatan aka didn’t  know ho w to reply . Hiran yaka, he thought,  was a very 
knowledgeable  being and that  was a strong reason for hi m to seek  his friendship. Turning  to the  rat, he said, 
“Seven w ords are  enough to bring  two good people together.  We have alread y talked  a lot,  which makes  us 
good friends.  That’s why  please believe  what I say . If it is not pos sible,  I will  stay out and  you can talk  to m e from  within y our stronghold.”  
Impressed  by his sincerit y, Hirany aka said,  “Okay , you should  not step inside  my fort.”  When 
Laghupatanak a agreed  to that  condition,  the two beca me friends  and enjoy ed their  daily meet ings and long 
talks.  They  helped  each  other,  the crow bringing  pieces of m eat and relics  of offerings to God at  templ es for 
the rat and  the rat  in turn  bringing for Hiran yaka grains of padd y and food items.  Thus they  beca me great  and 
inseparable  friends. 
 
2.Meeting  a Ne w Friend 
Hiran yaka, the mouse,  and Laghupatanak a, the crow, became  great  friends. One day , the crow came  calling 
on the  mouse  with e yes full of tears.  Worried,  the mouse  asked,  
“What’s the m atter?  Why are you so sad?” 
“I am  thoroughl y fed up with this  country . I want  to go elsewhere,”  replied  the crow. 
“But what is the  reason for this sudden change  of mind,”  asked the  mouse.  
“There is a  famine  here. People  are d ying like locusts. N o one  is offering cooked  rice for the peace  of the 
dead.  So, I don ’t have food. Hunters are  busy trapping  birds in  their  nets. I have escaped  narrowly . I don’t 
know when m y turn will com e. I want to  leave  this countr y before it  comes,”  said the crow. 
“What are  your travel  plans then,”  asked the  mouse.  
"There  is a big  lake in  the m iddle  of a vast forest in  the south. I have  a friend  there, a  turtle  who se name  is 
Mandharaka.  He is a great  host who will feed  me with  fish, pieces of m eat etc. I will  spend m y time happil y 
with him daily discussing smal l and big  things in the  world. I don’t want to  die miser ably in a hunter’s net.”  
Laghupatanak a continued,  “Elders have  alway s said that  they are happ y who are  fortunate  not to witness the 
destruction  of crops and  the decline  of the people.  Nothing is i mpossible  for a  competen t person. There  is no 
land that does not respond to effort.  For a scholar ever y country  is his own countr y and there  is no enem y for 
a sweet- tongued person. Learning  and power are not the  same.  Remem ber that the king  is respected  only  in 
his countr y but a scholar  is honoured ever ywhere. ” 
Hiran yaka said, “If that is so, I will  also follow y ou. I am  also ver y sad.”  
“Why  are y ou sad?” a sked the crow. 
“It is a long stor y. I shall  tell you when I reach  your friend’s place,”  said the mouse.  “But how can y ou come  with me, ” asked the  crow. “ I am a bird and can  fly. You cannot  do that,”  said the 
crow. 
“That is no proble m. I will  sit on y our back  and we can fl y off,” suggested the  mouse.  
“That’s an idea.  I will  be doubly  happ y there because  I have  the compan y of the  turtle  and also y ours. Come, 
get on to m y back. We will  fly together,”  said the  crow. 
On a fine  day, the crow with the mouse  on his back flew to  the great  lake  in the  middl e of the  forest. His 
friend  Mandharaka,  the turtle,  saw him  with the  mouse  on his back and  thought, “This crow is not an  
ordinar y crow. It is better  I hide  from  him. ” The turtle  immediately ducked under water.  But the  crow sa w 
the turtle  going down and understood  that his friend did not  recognize  him.  The crow then  left the mouse  at 
the bottom  of a tree  and fl ying to the  top of it  loudly  addressed  the turtle,  “O Mandharaka,  I am  your friend 
Laghupatanak a. Come  out and welco me me who has come  to see an old  friend after  a long  time. ” 
Recognizing  his friend’s voice,  Mandharaka ca me out of the water  and with tears  of joy in his ey es, said, “O 
Laghupatanak a, I am  so happ y you have com e. Come  and hug me.  We are me eting  after  a long ti me and 
that’s  why I could  not i mmediately recognize  you. You know the sa ying that you should  not make  friends 
with him whose power and pedigree  are not known to yo u.” 
The crow then ca me down from  the tree and the  two of them  embraced  each  other in  joy. They  began  telling 
each other  about what happened  in the long interval  of their  separation.  The mouse,  Hirany aka, too came  out 
of the  hole he  was hiding  in, greeted  the turtle  and sat  by the crow’s side. The  turtle  asked the  crow, “O 
Laghupatanak a, who is this littl e friend  of yo urs? Why  did y ou bring hi m here  on yo ur back though he  is 
your food.”  
“He is m y friend Hiran yaka. I can’t  live without hi m. Just as yo u can’t count  the stars in the sk y and the 
sands on the seashore,  I can’t recount  his great  qualities.  He is fed  up with this world. That  is why  he has 
followed  me on m y visit to  you,” said the  crow. 
“But there  should  be some  reason for his despair,”  said the  turtle.  The crow replied,  “I have  asked him to tell 
me the reasons. He said he  would tell us after m eeting  you.” Turning  to the  mouse,  the crow asked  him, 
“Now it  is yo ur turn to tell  us why  you are so fed up with  the world. 
Hiran yaka began  telling  his stor y. 
3.The Herm it and The Mouse 
“In the southern cit y of Mahilarop ya,” said Hirany aka, “lived  a hermi t nam ed Tamr achud  in a Shiva te mple 
on the  outskirts of the  city. Every  day, he w ould go out into  the cit y, collec t alms  and cook his food. After the  
meal, he would store whatever  is left  in his begging  bowl and hang it  to a peg  and go to sleep.  He w ould give the leftovers  to poor people  in return  for services rendered  to the  temp le. They would every  day wash it, 
clean  it and decorate  it with  patterns of chalk.”  
“One da y, some of m y relativ es compla ined to me, “O lord,  the herm it is storing  the food in  his bo wl and 
hanging  it high to a peg.  We are  not able  to nibble  at it. You alone  can reach  any place.  Why should  we go 
anywhere else when y ou are there? Let’s go to the  hermi t’s place  and with  your help feed  ourselves.”  
“Accompanied  by my relatives,  I went to the  hermi t’s place  and springing at  the bowl brought  the stored  food 
down. All of us then  had a good mea l. We repeated  this act  ever y day till the hermi t found what we were  
doing.  He brought a split  bamboo  and began striking  the food bowl with  it. That  noise used to  frighten  us and 
we would spend the  whole night  waiting  for a respite  from  this noise.  But the her mit never stopped striking  
the bamboo.”  
“Meanwhile,  a visitor nam ed Brihat  cam e calling  on the herm it. Tamrachud  received  him with great  respect 
and did whatever  he could to  make  the honoured guest  happy . At night,  the guest would relate  to the  hermi t 
tales about  his travels.  But Tamra chud,  busy  scaring the  mice with his ba mboo,  would not pa y much 
attent ion to what  his guest was narrating.  In the midd le of the stor y, the guest would ask him  questions  to 
which  he w ould give indifferent  replies.  
“Angry with  Tamrachud’s  absent  mindedn ess, the  visitor  told hi m, “Tamrachud,  you are not a  great  friend of 
mine because  you are not  attentive  to what I am  telling  you. I will leave  your place  tonight  and seek s helter 
elsewhere.  The elders  have alwa ys said that  you must  not accept  the hospitalit y of such a host who does not  
welco me you gladl y, does not  offer yo u a proper seat  and does not mak e inquiries  about  your well-being.”  
“Status has gone to y our head.  You do not any  more  care for m y friendship. You do not know that  this 
conduct  will take  you to hell.  I am  reall y sorry for what  has happened  to you. You have  become  vain and 
proud. I am  leaving  this te mple  at once,”  Brihat  said. 
“Frightened  at his visitor’s words, Tamrachud  pleaded  with hi m, “O worshipful  guest, please  don’t be harsh 
on me.  I don’t have  any friends other  than y ou. Here is the  reason why  I wa s not  attentive  to your discourse 
on religion.  There is this  mouse,  which ever y day steals m y food ho wever  high I keep  it. As a result,  I am  not 
able to feed  the poor people who do the  job of keeping  the te mple  clean.  The templ e is now in a bad  shape. 
To scare this culprit,  I have to keep  tapping  the food bowl with  the bamboo  stick I keep  with me.  This is why 
I was not able  to pa y attention  to the great  and learned  tales y ou have  been relating. ” 
“Realizing  what  reall y was the problem,  the visitor  asked the  hermi t, “Do you know w here the mouse  lives ?” 
“Sir, I have no idea,”  said Ta mrachud.  
“The visitor  said, “ This mouse  must  have  stored a lot  of food s omewher e. It is this  plent y that gives him  the 
energ y to jump  so high and eat  all your food. When a  man  earns a  lot of wealth,  that pile of mone y increases 
his strength  and confidence.”  
“Brihat continued,  “There  is an explanation  for every thing in this world. There  is a reason  for S handili  trying to exchange  husked sesame  seeds in return  for degraded sesame  seeds.” 
“Tamrachud  asked Brihat  to tell  him who this Shandili  was and the  story  of se same seeds.” 
 
4.Shandili  and Sesa me Seeds 
“Brihat began  telling  the stor y. "I sought the  hospitali ty of a Brahmin  one day for sacred cere moni es 
connected  with the  monsoon  season. He was kind enough to  offer me  space in his house and  in return I used 
to render services  he found u seful  in his rituals.  As this arrangem ent continued,  one fine  morning  I heard  the 
Brahm in and his wife  Shandili  discus sing what they  should do for the  day. The husband  told his wife, 
“Today  is the  time  when the Sun begins his northward  journe y and a tim e when the  rich and pious people  
offer  gifts to Brahm ins. I am  going  to the  next village  to receive  the offerings. You will  do w ell to invite  a 
Brahm in as guest toda y and offer hi m food in the  name  of the Sun.” 
“The wife flew  into a rage  and told  him,  “How can  I offer any thing to an yone in yo ur povert y-stricken 
house ? Aren’t  you ashamed to make  such a  suggestion? I have  wasted  my entire  life as your wife. I haven’t 
tasted  a good me al so far even  on a single  day. Nor do I have an y jeweller y.” 
“Though taken  aback, the  Brahmin  quickl y recovered  and said, “S uch words are not  becoming  of yo u. The 
learned  say that if you share even half  of yo ur meal  with a  mendican t, you will get whatever  you wish in life. 
What  good the  rich reap  by liberall y giving awa y, the poor get  by parting with  even a  cent the y have. The 
giver  deserves to be  served  even if  he is poor. But a rich  miser  is shunned. It  is like  the well  and the  sea. 
People  drink the  water from  the well  and not the  sea. We  must  alway s give  to him  who deserves. Greed  can 
only destroy  a person.” 
“How is it?” asked the  wife. 
“The husband then  told Shandili  the story  of the hunter  and the  greedy  jackal.  
A hunter  went to the  forest in search  of a kill.  Spotting  a well- fed boar he took  his bo w and  aimed  a sharp 
arrow at  the boar.  Though severel y wounded,  the boar mad e a wild  charge  at the  hunter goring  him to death. 
The boar too died  later  from  the wound s inflict ed by the hunter.”  
“Meanwhile,  a hungry  jackal,  not knowing that  he was doomed  to die,  came  on the scene  where the bodies  of 
the hunter and  the boar  lay. He was thrilled  by the sight of so much  food and  thought, “G od has favored  me 
today. That’s why  he has sent so much  food for me.  It is not without  reason that  the learned  have  said that  he 
who has done a good deed  in a previous  birth is rewarded  in this birth  even  if he does not m ake any effort. 
This great feast  is certainl y the result  of some good I have  done in a previous  birth. But  a man  must  enjoy his 
wealth  in sma ll doses. Therefore,  I will  begin m y meal  with this gut  of the bow.” 
The jackal  went  close to the  body  of the  hunter and began  nibbling  at the  gut of the  bow. The gut suddenl y 
snapped with  great  force killing  the jackal  in the end.  “That’s wh y,” the Brahmin  told his wife,  “Haven’t y ou 
heard  that a man’s  longevit y, destin y, wealth,  learning  and death  are predeterm ined by God even  as the child is in the womb  of the  mother.”  
“If that is the  case,”  Shandili  said, “ I have  some unhusked se same seeds in the  house. I will  make  a cake from 
it and serve it  to a Brahmin.”  Happy  at his wife’s word s, the  Brahmin  left for the next  village.  The wife 
soaked the  seeds in warm  water,  removed  their  husk and  left them  on a  cloth  to dry  in the  sun. A s the 
Brahm in’s wife was bu sy with  other chores, a  dog came  and peed on the  seeds left  on the cloth  to dry.” 
“When the  wife sa w what  the dog had done,  she felt miserable  that all her effort  had gone in vain.  She 
thought  that nobody  could undo God’s will. She thought,  “The se seeds cannot now be given  away  to an yone. 
I will  see if I can  exchange  them  for unhusked seeds. A nybody will agree  to this swap.” 
“Brihat continued  his story , “The Brahm in’s wife cam e to the same  house which I wa s visiting  to accept 
offerings.  She offered to exchange  the husked seeds to an yone ready  to accept  them.  Then the  woman  in the 
house ca me out and wa s read y to accept  the husked seeds from  the Brahmin’s  wife.  But her son intervened  
and told her, “M other,  these seeds are  not good. Wh y should an yone give awa y good hu sked seeds for the 
raw seeds?  There  must  be some reason for it.”  The housewife  at once  gave up the  idea  of taking husked seeds  
from  the Brahm in’s wife.” 
“After Brihat  comple ted the story, he asked Ta mrachud,  “Do yo u know the  route  he (Hiran yaka) takes to 
come here?” 
“I have no idea,”  said Ta mrachud.  
“Have you any tool to dig ?” asked the visitor.  
“Yes, I have  a dibble  with me.”  
“In that case,  let us follow  the mouse  trail before it  is erased,”  said the  visitor. 
Hiran yaka resumed  his account  and said, “Listening  to the  conversation  between Ta mrachud  and Brihat,  I 
thought  that my end had  come.  Just as he had  found m y food store, he is capable  of tracking  my fort.  Learned 
men can me asure  the strength of the  rival  by just looking  at hi m. I decided  immediately to take  a new route 
and was on m y way with  the other  mice when a fat  cat sighted us. He imm ediately pounced on us and killed  a 
number  of m y retinue.”  
“Excepting  me, those of the bloodied  mice who escaped  being killed  by the cat  took the  same  old route to  the 
fort. The visitor  saw the  trail of blood  the fleeing  mice left behind  and following  it reached  my fort. There, 
Brihat  and Ta mrachud  dug and found the  food store. The visitor  told Tamra chud,  “Here is the  secret  of the 
mouse’s  energ y. Now, yo u can sleep  in peace.”  Then the y took the  store to the  templ e, the home  of 
Tamrachud.”  
“I went back to  where I had stored food. It  was now like  a desert.  Without  food, the spot was a ghastl y scene. 
I did not know w here to go and what  to do to get  back m y peace  of mind.  Somehow,  I spent  the da y in sorrow and when it was dawn went to  the te mple  followed b y what re mained  of m y retinue.  Alerted  by the 
noise  we made, Tamrachud  again began  striking  the food bowl with  the bamboo.  Brihat,  the visitor,  asked 
him why  he wa s doing  so. Ta mrachud  told hi m about  our return.”  
“The visitor  laughed  and told Ta mrachud,  “Friend, don’t  be afraid  now. The  mouse  has lost his energ y. It 
cannot  do an y mischief  now.” When  I heard this,  I wa s angr y and tried  again  to jump at the  food bo wl and 
crashed  to the  ground before I could  reach the  bowl.” 
“I was dejected  by this failure.  But my sadness increased  when I heard  my retinue  telling each  other that  I 
was no more  capable  of earning  food for them  and they  should i mmediately give  up serving me.  I then 
realized  the importan ce of riches  and decided  to somehow  steal  it back from  Tamra chud.  When I m ade 
another  attempt, the visitor saw me  and banged the  bamboo  on m y head. I somehow  manag ed to escape.”  
“Elders have  alway s said that  man  gets w hat he is destined  to. Even  God cannot  alter  destiny . So, I stopped 
brooding  over what has happened  because what  is our s can  never beco me others”.  
“Explain  that to us,” asked Laghpatanak a and Mandharaka.  
5.Story of The Merchant’s Son 
“Sagargupta was a mer chant  living  in one of the  country ’s big cities.  He had  a son, w ho, one da y purchased a 
book whose only  content  was a single  verse. The verse  read: 
“Man gets  what is in his destin y
Even  God cannot prevent  it
To me it makes  no difference
What’s  mine  can never  become  others.” 
“What is the  price  of this book,” the  father  asked. 
“Hundred rupees,”  said the  son. 
The father  flew into  a rage and  said, “You are a fool.  You have  paid  hundred rupees for a book that  has onl y 
one verse. You can  never com e up in  life. Leave  my house at once.  It has no place  for y ou.” 
“Thro wn out  of the house, the  boy went to another  city and began  fresh life  there.  One day, a neighbor  asked 
him, “What  is yo ur native  place  and what  is yo ur name?”  
The boy replied,  “Man gets what  he is destined  to.” He gave  the same  answer to whoever asked for his nam e. From  that day onwards, people  began calling  him Praptav ya, meaning  the same  line he wa s reciting  to 
indicat e his name.  
“The summ er came  and the  city was celebrat ing it with a big  fair. One of the  visitors to the  fair was the  city’s 
princess Chandravati  and her ma ids. Chandravati  was yo ung and beautiful.  As she was making  the rounds of 
the fair, she saw an extre mely handsome  warrior  and im mediately fell in love  with him.  She told one of her 
maids, “It is y our job to see that  both  of us meet.” 
The maid  ran to the  warrior and told  him,  “I have a  message  for y ou from  our princess.  She says she will  die 
if you do not mee t her toda y.” 
“But tell  me where and how I can see her.  How can  I enter the  harem?”  asked the  warrior. 
The maid  told hi m, “Come to the  palace  and y ou will see a rope  hanging from  the high  wall. Climb and jump 
over the wall  with the  help of the  rope.” 
“All right,  I will tr y to do it  tonight,”  said the  warrior. 
When  the night  cam e, the warrior lost his nerve  and thought,  “O this is an improp er thing  to do. The  elders 
have  said, “H e who has liaison  with the  daughter of a  teacher,  wife of a  friend or of a mast er or of a servant 
commits the sin of killing  a Brahmin.  Also, don’t  do w hat brings yo u a bad nam e or what denies  you a place 
in heaven.”  In the end, the  warrior decided  not to mee t the princess and sta yed back at  home.  
“Coming  out for a walk in the  night,  Prapta  noticed  the rope outside  the ro yal palace  and curious to know 
what  it is, went up the  rope that  took  him inside  the princess”  bedroom.  The princess mistook  him for the 
warrior  and served him  dinner and with  great  ecstasy  told Prapta,  “I have fallen  in love with y ou at the very 
first sight. I am  yours. You are in  my heart  and nobod y except  you can be m y husband. Wh y don’t  you say 
someth ing.”  
“He replied,  “Man gets what he  is de stined  to.” The princess  imm ediately realiz ed that this man  was not  the 
warrior  she saw in the  day and asked  him to leave  the palace  at once.  She made  sure that  he climb ed back  the 
way he ca me. Prapta  left the place  and slept  that night  in a rundo wn te mple.  
“The sheriff of the  city came  to the  same  temple  where he had arranged  to meet  a woman  of vice.  He saw 
Prapta  sleeping  there  and to keep  his meet ing a secret,  he asked  Prapta  who he was. P rapta  recited  the verse 
about  destiny . The sheriff then  said, “S ir, this  is a bad place  to sleep. You can go to  my house and sleep  there 
tonight  in my place.”  The merchan t’s son agreed  to the proposal. 
“At the sheriff’s house, his yo ung and beautiful  daughter Vina yawati had asked her lover  to come  and me et 
her secretl y there in  the night.  When Prapta  cam e there  following  the sheriff’s advice,  Vina yawati mistook 
him in the  darkness for her secret  lover. She arranged  a feast  for him  and married  him according  to 
Gandharva  tradition.  Noticing  that Prapta  did not utter  a word, the  sheriff’s  daughter asked  him to say 
someth ing. Prapta  recited  his usual verse.  Vinay awati realized  her mistake  and asked him  to leave  at once. “As Prapta once  again  took to the  street,  he saw a marri age procession  entering  the cit y led by the 
bridegroo m nam ed Varakirti.  He joined the  procession. The bride  was the daughter  of a ver y wealth y 
merchant  of the cit y. This procession  reached  the wedding hall  somet ime before the  scheduled  time  for the 
wedding.  
“The bride’s father  set up a  costly and gail y decorated  dais for the wedding.  The bridal  party came  to the 
scene  of wedding a bit  in advance.  In the  meant ime, an elephant  went berserk and killing  the mahou t headed 
for the  marri age venue.  The bridegroo m and his part y joined the  frightened  people  who were fleeing  the 
scene  of marriag e. 
“Prapta  happened  to see the  frightened  bride  alone  and abandoned  on the dais shivering  in fear.  He j umped 
on to  the dais and  told the  merch ant’s  daughter  that she need not fear  for her life  and that  he would save her 
at any cost. With  great  courage  and presence  of mind  he approached  the elephant  with a stick  and began  to 
threaten  him.  The elephant  luckil y left the  scene. Prapta  took the  bride’s hand into  his as a token  of 
assurance.  
“When peace  returned,  Varakirti  and his friends and  relatives  also returned  to the dais and  seeing the  bride’s 
hand  in the hand  of a stranger, addressed  the merch ant, “Sir, yo u have pledged  the hand of y our daughter  to 
me. But I see that  you have  given her  away  to someone  else. This is i mproper.”  The merch ant replied,  “My 
son, I don’t know any thing. I also ran awa y from  the dais.  Let me ask m y daughter.”  
The daughter  told her  father, “This brave man  saved me  from  the mad  elephant.  He is m y savior. I won’t 
marr y anyone but him.”  It was no w dawn and hearing  the comm otion the royal princess also cam e to the 
wedding  venue to see  what happened.  The sheriff’s daughter  also cam e there  learning  what had  happened. 
The king also ca me there  and asked Prapta  to tell him every thing without fear.  Prapta as usual  recited  the 
verse. 
This verse rang a bell  in the  princess head.  She reme mbered what  happened in  the night  and thought  “Even 
God cannot  undo w hat is destined.”  The sheriff’s daughter  also recalled  the events of the  night  and thought 
“There is nothing  to regret  nor cause  for s urprise.”  Listening  to what  Prapta  said, the  merch ant’s  daughter 
also thought “n obod y can take  away  what destin y gives me.”  
“The king now knew every thing and the  mystery of the verse. He then  gave awa y his daughter  in marriag e to 
Prapta  and also a  thousand villages  as gift.  He also crowned Prapta  as the prince.  The sheriff  also marri ed his 
daughter  to Prapta.  The merchant’s  son lived  happil y ever  after with  his wives and parents. 
Hiran yaka, the mouse,  thus ended his stor y of troubles  and said:  
“Even God cannot  undo
What  is destined
There  is nothing  to regret
Nor cause for surprise
Nobody  can take  away
What  destin y gives me.”  "I am  disillusioned.  That  is why  my friend  Laghupatanaka  brought  me to you,” said the  mouse.  
Addressing the mouse,  Mandharaka, the  turtle  said, “O  Hiran yaka, the crow is yo u true friend.  Though he 
was hungry  and y ou were his me al, he did not kill  you. On the  other hand, he  brought y ou here  on his back. 
You must  mak e a friend  of him  who is uncorrupted  by wealth  and who stands by  you in time of trouble.”  
The turtle  continued,  “Therefore, sta y here without  fear or hesitation.  Forget the  loss of wealth  and shelter. 
Rem ember, the shade of a  passing cloud, friendship  of the wicked,  a cooked  meal,  youth and wealth  do not 
stay for long. Learned  men  are never  attached  to wealth.  It does not come  with y ou even  for a few feet  in 
your last journe y. There is a  lot of pain  in earning  mone y and protecting  it. Money , therefore,  brings grief.”  
“What is not  ours will  not sta y with us. H aven’t  you heard the  story of Somil aka who earned  a lot  of wealth 
but could not  keep it?” 
“How is that?” asked Hiran yaka. 
Mandharaka  began tell ing Hiran yaka the stor y of the  unluck y weaver.  
 
6.The Unluck y Weaver 
Somi laka was a weaver  living  on the edge  of the cit y. He was an expert  at making  fine garmen ts worthy  of 
kings and  princes. He enjoy ed the patronage  of the nobilit y. Despite  all this, he was poorer than  those 
weavers who were mak ing coarse  cloth for the  com mon people.  Worried  at his condition,  he told his wife, 
“Look dear, how rich  these weavers of coarse  cloth  have becom e. There  is something  wrong with  this place.  I 
am not a success here.  I will go elsewhere.”  
“No dear.  It is not true  that you can be  successful  elsewhere. Our luck  is linked  to what we have  done in a 
previous  birth. If y ou have  done a good deed  in your previous birth,  you will reap the  harvest in  this birth 
without  your effort.  If yo u don’t have it  in your destin y, you will not get it  even  with effort.  Just as sun and 
shade are  inseparable,  cause  and effect  are also linked  to each  other.”  
Somi laka did not agree  with her.  He said,  “Without  effort,  you can achieve  nothing. Without  cause  there  is 
no effect.  Even  if you get a good mea l as a result  of a good deed  in the  past, yo u have to  use your hand to eat 
it. Wealth  com es to a person who toils.  There is no point  in chanting  the name  of God. Y ou must  do yo ur bit 
first. If yo u are not successful  despite  your effort,  you are not  to bla me. Therefore,  I have  decided  to go 
abroad.”  
Ignoring  his wife’ s pleas,  Somilak a left his place  and reached  Vardham anapura m. Working  day and night,  he 
earned  three  hundred gold sovereigns  within three  years. He thought  he should go home  now and  started the 
homeward  trek. At dusk he found himse lf in the midd le of a forest. Wild  anima ls began their  hunt  for prey . 
The weaver cli mbed  a tall  tree and went  to sleep on a  big branch. He saw a drea m: The God of Action  and the  God of D estin y were talking  to each other.  Destiny asked Action,  “The weaver is 
not destined to  live in luxur y. Why did yo u give hi m three  hundred sovereigns?” Action replied,  “I have to 
give to those who tr y and toil. Whether  the weaver  can keep  it or not  is in y our hands.” 
The dream  jolted  the weaver.  He looked into  his bag and  found the sovereigns m issing.  Heart-broken, 
Somi laka began cr ying, “Oh I have lost what  I have earned  in three  years with  great effort.  I have beco me a 
poor man  again.  I cannot  go home  in this  condition  and show m y face  to m y wife.”  He sa w no point  in 
brooding  over what has happened  and decided  to go to  Vardhamanapur am and try again.  
This time,  he could  collect  five hundred sovereigns in  one ye ar. He stored  all this mone y in a small  bag and 
began  his homeward  journey . When it  was s undown, he had alread y entered  a forest. This ti me, he did not 
sleep,  afraid  that he w ould lose his mone y. He continued  to walk through  the forest. This  time  also he saw 
those  two per sons he saw earlier  in his dream  coming  in his direction.  
They repeated  the same  conversation  about  God re warding  a hardworking  person and  destiny  denying it. He 
immediately looked  into his bag  and found there  was no gold  in it.  This tim e Somil aka lost his courage and 
thought  he should com mit suicide.  He made  a strong rope with the  fibers he found in  the forest. He tied  one 
end of the rope to  a high branch  of the tree  and m ade a noose of the  other  end. Every thing was ready  for his 
suicide  when he heard  a voice  in the  skies:  
“O Somil aka, don’t  be rash. I am  destin y who took away  your wealth.  I cannot  give y ou more than  what is 
necessar y for yo ur bare needs. Not a  single cent  more.  But I am  pleased  with  your adventurous spirit.  Ask for 
a boon. I s hall give  it.” 
“Please give  me lots of w ealth,”  said the weaver.  
“What do y ou do with  so much  mone y,” asked the voice.  
The weaver replied,  “People serve hi m who is rich even  if he is a  miser.”  
“In that case,  go back to  Vardhamanapura m where two wealth y merchants,  Guptadhana  and Upabhuktadhana  
are doing business. A fter study ing them well,  decide  who yo u want to becom e, Guptadhana,  the man  who 
earns a  lot of mone y but does not  spend a  cent  of it or Upabhuktadhana,  the man  who earns but  also en joys 
the wealth  he has amassed.”  
Somi laka followed their  advice  and went  back to Vardham anapura m reaching  the place  in the  evening  after a 
tiring  journey . With  great  difficult y he traced  Guptadhana’s  house and entered  it despite  resistance  from  the 
merchant’s  family. When the  time  for dinner ca me, the merch ant grudgingl y gave  food to Somilak a, 
suggesting  that he  was an unwanted  guest. The  weaver found a corner  in the  house w here he could  sleep. 
Somi laka again had  the same  dream  in which Action  and Destiny  were debating  Guptadhana  giving  food to 
him. Destin y told Action,  “You have mad e Guptadhana  give food to  Somilaka. ” 
Action  said, “Y ou cannot  blam e me. I had to ensure that  Somal ika was fed. It  is for yo u to decide  who 
deserved  what.”  
Next  day, Destiny saw to it  that Guptadhana  had an attack  of cholera  and had to miss  his mea l. In this  manner 
what  was given  away  was saved.  
Later,  Somi laka visited  Upabhuktadhana’s  house where the  host welcomed  him with great  love and  respect. 
The weaver had a  good meal  and slept.  He had a dream  as usual, the  same  two figures appearing  in the 
dream. 
Destin y told Action,  “O Action, the  host has s pent a lot  of mone y to entertain  Somilaka.  He even borrowed to  
make the guest happy . It is not in his destin y to have  surplus. How will he  repay  what he  has borrowed?” 
Action  replied,  “My  job is to  see Somilak a got what  he deserved. If Upabhuktadhana  crossed the  limits in 
enterta ining  his guest,  that is not m y fault.  It is for y ou to decide  what should be done.”  
Next  day, a messenger  from  the ro yal household ca me to Upabhuktadhana  and gave hi m a big  sum of mone y 
on behalf  of the  king. 
Somi laka thought, “It is better  to be  like Upabhuktadhana.  He enjo ys life with whatever  he has. What’s the  
use of being  rich but  miserl y? I will better  be Upabhuktadhana.”  Pleased,  the Gods s howered on hi m the 
wealth  that he needed  to enjo y life. 
 
7.The R escue of  a Deer 
Mandharaka  ended the  story of Somil aka telling  Hirany aka and Laghupatanaka  that a rich  person who does 
not spend  mone y is as poor as any  poor person can  be. Not being able  to enjoy is com mon to both the poor 
and the miser ly rich.  Nothing  on this earth  is greater  than  charit y and there  is no greater  enem y than 
miser liness.  
The crow then advised  Hirany aka, “Listen  to what the  turtle  is sa ying. Elders  have said  that it is easier  to get 
friends  who talk  sweetl y but difficult  to find friends who venture  to tell  you the truth  however  bitter  it is. The 
latter  alone  deserve to be  called  friends. 
The crow and the  mouse  put a brake  to their  conversation  when the y saw a frightened  deer darting  towards 
the lake.  The crow flew to  the top  of a tree.  The mouse  scamp ered into his hole  and the  turtle  sank into the 
water.  From  the treetop,  the crow could  see the deer  now clearl y and told  his other  friends, “ Friends, he is only a deer who is thirst y. These footfalls  are not those of a man. ” 
The turtle  replied,  “The deer is panting.  It seems  someone  is chasing  him.  He has not  come  to quench his 
thirst.  Surely , some  hunter migh t be after  him.  Please go to  the top  of the tree  and look  if yo u can find  any 
hunter.”  
Assured  that these  are friends  only , the deer named  Chitranga,  now said, “F riend,  you have guessed correctl y. 
I have  escaped the  arrow of the  hunter and reached  here  with difficult y. I am  in search of a shelter  the hunter 
cannot  reach.  Please show me  a place  safe from  the hunter.”  
Mandharaka,  the turtle,  said, “the scriptures have  ment ioned  two wa ys of escaping  danger. One is to use y our 
muscl e power and another  is to run as fast  as yo u can. No w, run into  the forest before the  hunter  could 
come.” 
“That is not  necessary ,” said Laghupatanaka,  the crow. 
“I have seen the  hunters taking  a good catch  of food and  going the wa y they cam e. O Mandharaka, y ou can 
now come  out of the  water.” 
With  Chitranga,  the deer, the y becam e now four friends, happil y spending ti me in each  other’s compan y. The 
learned  have  said that  when yo u have plent y of cordial  conversation,  to be happ y you do not  need a  woman. 
The man  who has no store of good words is not capable  of uttering  them. 
One da y, Chitranga  had not com e when the  other three  had gathered  at the lakeside  for their dail y discourse. 
They thought, “P oor Chitranga  has not come  so far.  Is it possible  that a lion  or a hunter  has killed  him?  Or, is 
it possible  that he has fallen  into a pit?” Well- wishers naturall y suspect  the worst when their  near and  dear 
ones are  not seen for a while.  
Mandharaka  told the crow, “F riend,  you know neither  Hirany aka nor I can  move  fast.  You alone  can fly and 
see mor e things than  we can. Please  go im mediately and find out  what is happening  to our friend.”  
The crow did not fl y too long before  he saw Chitranga  trapped  in a hunter’s net  near  a small  pond. M oved  by 
his plight,  the crow said, “F riend,  what happened  to yo u?” Trying to check  tears  in his ey es, the deer said, 
“Death is chasing  me. It is good that  you came to see me.”  
The crow said, “ Friend,  don’t lose courage  when we are here.  I will rush back and  bring Hiran yaka here.” 
Laghupatanak a flew fast  to where the  mouse  and the  turtle  were anxiousl y waiting  for him  to come  and tell 
them what happened  to the deer.  On hearing  his account,  Hiran yaka immediately decided  that he should go 
and bite off the  strings of the  hunter’s net. 
He got  on to the back  of the  crow and  together  they  flew  to the  spot where the deer  lay helplessl y in the 
hunter’s net.  When the  deer  saw his friends rushing to  his aid, he  realized  how necessary  it was to collect 
good friends  and ho w nobod y could  overcom e troubles  without the  help  of good friends. Hiran yaka asked the  deer, “H ow did y ou, such a learned  being,  get into this  hole ?” The deer  replied,  “Friend, 
this is not a ti me for a  debate.  The hunter  may come any time.  First, get m e out of this  net.”  The mouse 
laughed  and said,  “Why are you scared  of the  hunter when I am  here ? But  tell me how did y ou let yourself 
trapped  in this  way? ” 
The deer replied,  “Friend,  when luck  is not with y ou, you will lose discretion.  As the elders  say when death is 
lurking  for yo u and when wickedness overtakes  you, your thoughts too  take a  crooked path.  Nobod y can save 
you from  what God ha s in store for y ou.” 
As they  were discussing their  plan  to escape,  Laghupatanaka  and Hirany aka saw that  the turtle  also was 
coming. The crow said, “ Look, this  slow-footed  guy is coming.  Neither  can we save the  deer or ourselves. 
See this fellow’s foolishness. If the  hunter comes,  I can fl y away and yo u can beat  a fast  retreat.  But how can 
this turtle  escape?” 
The hunter ca me when the y were debating  this point. The  mouse  did a  fast j ob of biting  off the  strings of the 
net and the  deer rushed into  the thick  forest.  The mouse  too disappeared  into the  nearest  hole. But  the poor 
turtle  was slowly  plodding  its wa y to safet y. But the  hunter saw him  and bound him  to his bow and slung it  
across his shoulder and  began going hom e. 
Hiran yaka saw this from  a distance  and began reflect ing, “Troubles do not com e in singles.  I have alread y 
lost every thing I have. I have  lost m y relativ es and m y retinue.  Now, this loss of a great  friend!  We come 
close  to each  other onl y to part.  Every thing in this  world is temporar y. Yet, I am  grateful  to God, for, he has  
created  this s weet  relationship  we call  friendship.”  
Meanwhile,  the deer and the  crow came,  disturbing  the mouse’s  reverie.  Recovering,  Hiran yaka said, “Let’s 
not brood over the past.  Let us first  look for a wa y to rescue  the turtle.”  The crow said,  “Listen,  and do as I 
tell you. Chitranga  will go to  a small  lake  on the hunter’s wa y taking  him home.  He should pretend  he is dead 
and I will sit  on his head and pretend  pecking  his ey es. Seeing  the mot ionless  deer,  the hunter  will then rest 
the turtle  on the  ground and reach  for the deer.  Hirany aka should  at once  reach the  turtle  and bite  off the 
strings binding  him to the  bow.” 
“All right,  we will  do as y ou say,” said the  mouse  and the deer.  Mean while,  the hunter,  seeing  the motionl ess 
deer,  thought it  was dead. Leaving  the turtle  on the  ground, he cam e to the  deer.  The deer  at once  ran away 
and the crow flew awa y. At the  other  end, the mouse  bit off the  strings binding  the turtle  to the bow. The 
turtle  entered  water and the  mouse  ran to  his hole. 
Disappointed,  the hunter returned  to where  he had rested  the turtle.  When  he found that  the turtle  had 
escaped,  he cried  bitterl y and went home.  After making  sure that  they  were far  away  from  the hunter’s reach, 
the four friends gathered  and celebra ted their  reunion.  
Concluding  his discourse, Hiran yaka said, “It is a lesson to m ankind  on the  value  of friendship. One should  
not try to cheat  friends.  The elders  have said that  he who is faithful  to his friends shall  never taste  defeat”. 
Thus we come  to the  end of the  second part of Panchatantr a called  Gaining  Friends.  
Third Strategy: Of  Crows And Owls  
This third part of  the Panchatantra  begins with  a verse: 
Trust not  even a close  friend
Who earlier  was your enemy. 
This is the  story of how the crows burnt the  home of a trusting pack  of owls. 
Once upon a  time  all the crows in a  town called  Mahilarop ya made  a huge ban yan tree their  home.  The tree 
had hundred s of branches.  Their  king, known as Meghavarna, set  up strong fortifications  to ensure securit y 
for his brood. Sim ilarly, the owls of the  town made  a nearby  cave  their  colon y. They  also had  a king, called 
Arimard ana, who ruled  with the  help of a strong and  cunning arm y. 
The owl king kept  a close e ye on the  bany an tree and on account  of previous en mity killed  every  night  any 
crow he sighted  outside  the tree.  Slowly , the owl king manag ed to kill  all crows that  could be  seen outside 
the tree.  That  is w hy wise men  had alway s said that  whoever neglects  disease or the  enem y perishes  in their 
hands. 
Alarm ed at the loss of his flock,  Meghavarna  assembled  his minist ers and asked the m to prepare a  plan to 
fight  the owls. He placed  before  them  six strategies  and asked the m to nam e the best of the  six. The first 
minister suggested  comprom ise as a tactic  because one  had first to  survive  to gather  strength  and later  destroy 
the enem y. The elders  have said, 
“Bend to the  enem y when he  is strong
Attack  him when he is vulnerable.
Don’t wage a  war if it  doesn’t bring
Power, or wealth  or friendship.”  
The second minist er ruled  out compro mise and offered tricker y as a formu la. He cited  the examp le of how 
Bhee ma in the Mahabharata  had killed  Keechaka  in the  disguise of a woman.  He also quoted elders  saying, 
“Never accept  peace  with
An enem y who is not  just
For, he will  break his word
And stab y ou in the back.”  The minist er referred  to the  learned  as say ing that it is easy  to defeat  an ene my who is a t yrant, a miser,  an 
idler,  a liar,  a coward and a fool.  Word s of peace  will only infla me an ene my blinded  by anger. 
The third m inister  said, “ O lord, our ene my is not onl y strong but also wicked.  Neither  comprom ise nor 
tricker y will work with him.  Exile  is the  best way . We shall  wait and  strike when the  enem y becomes  weak.”  
“Neither  peace  nor bravado
Can subdue a  strong enem y
Where  these two do not  work
Flight  is the  best alternativ e.” 
The fourth min ister opposed all  these  tactics  and suggested  the king of crows should sta y in his o wn fort, 
mobi lize support from  friends  and then  attack  the enem y. He quoted  the learned  as saying, 
“A king  who flees  is like
A cobra without  fangs.
A crocodile  in water
Can haul an elephant. ” 
Therefore,  the minist er said, “A n ally is what wind is to  fire. The  king must  stay where he is and gather  allies 
for support.”  
The fifth m inister  offered a strateg y simi lar to that  of the fourth  and said, “Stay  in your fort and  seek the help 
of an  ally stronger  than the  enem y. It also pa ys to form  an axis of less strong allies.”  
After  listening  to all  the ministers,  Meghavarna  turned  to the  wisest and senior most  among  his counsels, 
Sthirajeevi,  and asked  him for his advice.  The wise man  told Meghavarna,  
“Oh, king  of cro ws, this is the  time to use duplicit y to finish  the ene my. You can thus keep  your throne.”  
“But learned  sir, we have no idea  of where Arimard ana lives  and of what  his failings are.”  
“That is not  difficult.  Send y our spies and gather  inform ation  on the ke y men  advising  the king  of owls. The 
next step is to divide  them by setting  one against  the other.”  
“Tell  me why  did the  crow s and  owls fall  out in the  first place,”  asked Meghavarna.  
Sthirajeevi  said, “That  is another stor y. Long,  long ago all  the birds in the  jungle—swans, parrots, cranes,  
nightingal es, owls, peacocks,  pigeons, pheasants,  sparrows, crows etc.—assembl ed and expressed  anguish 
that their  king Garuda  had become  indifferent  to their  welfare and  failed  to save the m from  poachers. 
Believing  that people  without a protector  were like  passengers in  a ship without  a captain,  they decided  to 
elect  a new king. The y chose an owl as their  king. As the owl was being crowned,  a crow flew into  the assembl y and asked the m why  and what the y were 
celebrat ing. When  the birds told  him the details,  the crow told  them,  the owl is a wicked  and ugl y bird and it 
is unwise to  choo se another  leader  when Garuda  is still  alive.  To crush enem ies it is enough if y ou men tioned 
Garuda’s name  or for that  matter the name  of any one who is great.  That  was how the hares  managed  to live 
happil y by taking  the name  of the moon.”  
The birds asked the  visiting  crow, “Tell  us ho w this  has happened.”  
“I will tell  you,” said the  crow and  began telling  them  the stor y of the  hares and the  elephants.  
1.Elephants  and Hares  
Once upon a  time  a great  elephant  called  Chaturdanta  ruled  over a vast  stretch of forest  as the king  of his 
subjects.  They  were  not happy  because  for several  years there  had been no rains  and all  the lakes,  tanks, 
ponds and water  holes in the  forest beca me arid.  The subjects went in  a delegation  to the  king and appealed  
to him,  “O migh ty king,  there is no water  to drink  in the forest.  Many  of the y ounger ones are  on the verge  of 
extinct ion. Please  look for a lake  full of water and save  us.” 
The king told  them,  “I know of a hidden lake  that is alwa ys full of water.  Let us go there  and save ourselves.”  
The elephants  then set  off for the hidden  lake  and after  plodding through  the jungle for five  nights reached 
the great  lake.  They  colonized  the land  around the lake  and once again  started  their  revelry  in water. But  as 
the elephants  daily marched  their  way  to the  lake,  they  trampled  upon hundreds of hares that  made  the land 
around  the lake  their  home.  Hundreds of them  died  and thousands more  were m aimed. 
One da y the hares assembled  to chalk  out a  plan to  save themselv es from  the menac e of the  way ward 
elephants.  An older  one among  them said,  “these elephants  will come  every  day and every  day man y of us 
will die. We must  find a solution  to this proble m.” 
A wiser one among  them  said, “ The great Manu had  said that  it was better  to abandon a person to  save the 
whole  comm unity, abandon  the com munity to save the  village  and abandon the  village  to save the countr y. 
Even  if the  land were  fertile,  a wise king  would abandon it  if it were in the  interests  of his s ubjects.” 
But the other  hares protested  and said, “H ow can we do that? We  have been  living  here for several 
generations.  Let us find an  alternative.  Let us see  if we can scare  the elephants  by some  means.”  
Some  of them  said, “We know of a trick  that works with the elephants.  However, we need  a ver y intell igent 
person.” 
Pressed to reveal  the plan, the y said, “O ur ruler  Vijayadatta lives in  the lunar  sphere. Let  us send a messenger  
to the elephant  king. The plan  is to tell  the elephant  king that  the Moon does not like  the elephants  visiting 
the lake  for water because  they  are killing  and maim ing hundreds of hares. The  Moon has declared  the lake 
out of bound s for the  elephants.”  Some  others agreed  and said, “Y es, there  is a hare  whose name  is Lamb akarna.  He is an expert  negotiator.  He 
can do the job with success.” 
After  a lot of discussions, the  hares decided  to send La mbakarna  to the  elephant  king. Addressing the  king, 
Lambakarna  said, “O  heartless  king, I live  in the  lunar  sphere.  The Moon has sent me  as envoy  to you. This 
lake belongs to  the Moon. He has forbidden all  of you from  drinking water  from  the lake.  So, go back.”  
“But where is y ou lord, the  Moon,” asked the  elephant  king. 
Lambakarna  said, “H e is ver y much  in this lake.  He has come  to console the  survivors of y our rampage.”  
“Then, let  me see him,”  the elephant  king challenged  the envo y. 
“Come  alone  with me,  I will  show yo u.” 
“Let us go then,”  said the  elephant.  
Lambakarna  took the  elephant  king  one night  to the lake  and showed the  reflection  of the  Moon in the  lake 
and said, 
“Here he is, our King, the  Moon. He is lost in  medi tation.  Move quietl y and salute  him.  Otherwise, y ou will 
disturb  his medit ation  and bring upon y ou his wrath.”  
Taking  him for the real  Moon, the elephant  king saluted  him and left  quietl y. The hares breathed  a sigh of 
relief  and lived  happil y ever after.  
The crow told the  birds gathered  to elect  a leader,  “that is why  it is importan t to choo se a wise and 
experienced  person as yo ur leader.  If yo u do not, listen  to this  story  of ho w a hare and a  partridge  destroy ed 
themselves  because  they chose a wicked  media tor.” 
“Very interesting, ” said the  birds and asked the  visiting  crow to tell  them  the account  of the  media tor. 
The visiting  crow began narrating  the story : 
 
2.The C unning  Mediator 
A sparrow w as living  in the  hollow of a  big tree  that I had made  my home.  His nam e was Kapin jala. We 
became good friends and used to spend our ti me discu ssing charact ers in our literatur e and the  unusual things 
we saw in our travels.  One day , my friend  left the tree with  other sparrows in search of food and  did not return  even after  nightfall.  I began to  worry. “What happened  to hi m? Did an y hunter  take  him away? He 
never  leaves  my compan y even for a while.”  
Days passed without an y trace  of m y friend  Kapin jala. One fine  morning,  a hare named  Sighragha, ca me and 
silentl y occupied  the hollow  that m y friend mad e his home.  It did not  worry me because  there  was no word 
about  Kapinjala and  I had lost all  hopes of his return.  But one da y, he returned  looking healthier  than  he wa s 
when he had  left and found that  the hare  had taken  his place.  
Kapinjala  told the  hare,  “O hare,  what y ou have  done is improper.  You have displaced  me. Leave  the place 
immediately.” 
Sighragha  hit back say ing, “What are  you talking? This is m y place.  Haven’t y ou heard  the elders  saying that 
nobod y has rights  over a public  well,  a temp le, a pond and a tree? Whoever  enjoys land  for more  than  ten 
years also becomes  its owner.  That  needs no evidence  or documen ts of proof. This place  is not  yours any 
more. ” 
The sparrow told  him,  “Oh, yo u are quoting  legal  scriptures! Let  us go to an  expert in  law and ethics.  We will 
abide  by his ruling.”  
The hare agreed  to this  propo sal and both  of them  went  in search of an  expert.  Curious to see what would  
happen,  I also followed  them.  Meanwhile,  word about  their quarrel  had reached  a wicked and  wild cat. 
Knowing the  route that  the hare and the  sparrow w ould take, the  cat set up a ca mp on the  way . He s pread  a 
mat of grass on the ground and  went into  a po sture  of medi tation. Facing  the sun and raising  his hands in 
worship, the  cat began  reciting  scriptures,  
“This w orld has no es sence.  Life  is passing. All liaisons  with lovers are  like a dream.  Your ties with the 
family are illusor y. There is no alterna tive to following  the right  path.  The learned  have  said,” 
  
“This w retched  body  will soon perish
Material  wealth  is not permanen t
Death  is knocking at  your door
Free thyself from  earthl y chains
He who abandons the  right path
Is the  same as the  living  dead.” 
“I will end this  long discourse and  tell you in a nutshell  what  the right  path is. Doing good to  others is virtue. 
Torm enting  others is vice.  This is the  essence  of our philosoph y. I am  in the  service  of G od and  have given 
up all  desires. I will  not do y ou any harm.  After hearing  your account,  I will  decide  who among  you is the 
rightful  owner of the  place  in the  tree.  But I am  now ver y old and cannot  hear y ou properl y. So, please co me 
close  to me  and narrate  your story.” 
When  the poor and  innocent  sparrow and  hare cam e within  the reach  of the  cat, he pounced on the m and grabbed  the sparrow in his teeth  and slashed the bod y of the  hare  with his ja ws and killed  them. 
The visiting  crow then told  the birds, “ That is w hy I tell  you if yo u rest y our faith  in this  wicked and blind 
owl, y ou will mee t the same  end as the  hare and  the sparrow.” The  birds then dispersed, deciding  to discus s 
the matter again  carefull y before electing  the owl as the  king. 
Meanwhile,  the owl was sitting  restlessl y on the throne  waiting  for his coronation.  
He asked his wife  Krikalika,  “What  is all  this dela y in crowning m e.” 
The wife told  him,  “My  lord,  it is this  crow w hich has sabotaged the  coronation.  All the birds have  dispersed. 
Only  this crow is lingering  here. Come,  let us go. I will  take  you home.”  
Furious, the  owl shouted  at the  crow, “ You wicked crow, what  harm  have  I done to y ou? You have  wrecked 
the coronation.  This is enough  reason that  from  toda y there shall  be enm ity between  owls and crows. O ne can 
heal wound s inflic ted on the  body  but not  the heart.”  
Dejected,  the owl went  home  with his wife.  
The crow began reflecting,  “Oh, what a foolish  thing have  I done ? Unnecessaril y, I have m ade enemies.  I 
should not  have advised  the birds not  to elect  the owl as the king.  Elders have  aptly said, 
“Word s out  of tune with  times
Words that  bring grief  in the  end
Words that  bring pain  to others
Are, an y day, as good as poison.” 
Regretting  what he had  said and done, the  visiting  crow also went home.  This is how enmi ty began  between 
the owls and the crows. 
After  listening  to the  story , Meghavarna asked  Sthirajeevi, “What should we do in  such a situation? 
Sthirajeevi,  the wise crow, told him,  “There  is a strateg y better  than  the six I had  alread y told y ou. With  its 
help,  I will  myself go and conquer  the owl king.  The learned  have  said that  men  with great  comm on sense 
and a little  bit of cunning  can subdue stronger  enemi es like the tricksters  who cheated  the gullible  Brahm in of 
his la mb.”  
On Meghavarna’s request,  Sthirajeevi  began telling  him the Brahmin’s  story. 
 3.The B rahm in and The C rooks 
Mitra  Sarma  was a Brahm in living  in a small  village.  He used to dail y worship Fire. It  was the month  of 
Magha (Februar y). The sky  was full  of clouds and  it had  alread y started raining.  Sarma  left for a neighboring 
village  at that  time to seek the  gift of a  sacrifici al lamb  from  some rich man.  He called  on a well-to- do man  in 
the village  and requested hi m to mak e him a gift  of a health y lamb for sacrifice  to Gods. The  wealthy  man 
gave  him one of the well- fed la mbs he had. 
Carrying the la mb on his shoulders, the  Brahmin  began his homeward  journe y. Three  crooks, ver y hungr y 
and emaci ated,  cros sed his path and seeing  the health y lamb  on the Brahm in’s shoulders  thought, “A h, God 
has sent us good food. Let  us trick  the Brahm in into parting  with it  and free us from  hunger  and cold.”  At 
once,  they  began  to act.  
One of the m changed  into a disguise, and overtaking  the Brahmin  by another  route, stopped  him and said, “O 
what  a fool y ou are? Such a great  worshipper  of Fire, why  are y ou carrying this dog on y our shoulders? This 
will bring y ou ridicule.  Don’t you know that  it is a sin to  touch a dog, or a  rooster, or a donke y?” 
The Brahmin  lost his temp er and said,  “You stupid fellow,  are y ou blind? Why  do y ou call a lamb a dog?” 
The first crook replied,  “Don’t be angry , if you think he is not  a dog, please  carry  on. I have  no ob jection.”  
The Brahmin  hardly  walked  a little  distance  when the  second  crook greeted  him and said, 
“O respected  sir, it  is highl y regrettable  that y ou are carry ing a dead  calf on y our shoulders, however dear  it 
is to you. The man  who touches  dead ani mals  or birds ha s to undergo purification  rites.”  
The Brahmin  challenged  him, “Are you too blind ? This  is a live  sacrificial  lamb  and yo u say he is a dead 
calf.”  
The second crook said, “All right,  sir. Please excuse  me. I am  an ignorant  fool. Do as it  pleases yo u.” 
Now it was the turn  of the third  crook to  cros s the Brahmin’s  path.  
Turning  to the  Brahmin,  the crook  said, “Sir, it  is highly  improper.  You are  carry ing a donkey  on yo ur 
shoulders. This is not  done. The  elders have  said he who touches a donke y, knowingl y or otherwise,  has to 
take a bath  fully dres sed. So, please  leave  him before an ybody notices  it.” 
Thinking  that he was reall y carrying a donke y, the poor Brahmin  threw the  lamb  to the  ground and went 
home.  Sthirajeevi,  continuing  his advice  to Meghavarna,  said, 
“There is hardl y any personWho is not  misled  by
The servilit y of a new servant  or
The sweet  word s of a  guest or
The mock  tears  of a wil y woman.”  
“Also, rem ember not to quarrel  with weak  men  when the y are united  because  they  cannot  be defeated.  See, 
for exa mple,  how a deadly  snake  becomes  prey of a united  army of ants.  That is wh y I want to  tell you a few 
words of caution.  Follow them. ” 
“We shall  do a s you command us,” said Meghavarna. 
Sthirajeevi  then  began revealing  his plan, “A part from  the four strategies  I had told  you, there  is a fifth one. 
In the  presence  of every one, abuse m e and punish me  branding m e as the  friend of y our enem y. That  will 
convince  the spies of our enem y that you don’t trust me  any more.  Bring some  blood  and s pray it on m y 
body. Then  exile  to the  Rishy amooka hills.”  
“I shall rema in here  bruised and when the  enem y comes,  I will  try to earn  his merc y and trust b y blaming 
you. You stay  in the hills  till I find their  fort and give  you a signal when all  the owls are  sleeping  in the  day. 
Then  you can com e and with  the help  of yo ur army kill all the owls. This plan is the  result  of great thought. 
We have no alternat ive.”  
On Meghavarna  approving the  plan, Sthirajeevi  started  a mock  fight  with the  king of crow s. The  king’s men 
and others, mistak ing it for a real  duel, were  ready  to kill  Sthirajeevi  when Meghavarna  told them,  “Don’t 
interfere.  Go awa y. I will have  the pleasure  of punishing this  unfaithful  fellow.”  Meghavarna then  pretended 
to attack  Sthirajeevi  with his beak  and doused him  in blood he  brought with him  and left  for the  hills. 
Then  Krikalika,  wife of the  pretender  who w as spy ing on the  crow camp,  carried  this new s of the  assault  on 
minister Sthirajeevi and  the king’s departure  for the  hills,  to the owl king  Arimardana.  Soon after sunset, the  
owl king,  accompan ied by his ministers  and followers, set out  to kill  all the crows. They  reached  the tree, 
home  of the crows, and surrounded it.  
Not finding  a single  crow there  and happy  for that  reason, Arimardan a told his men  to look for the  crow s so 
that they could chase  them  and kill  them.  Meanwhile,  Sthirajeevi,  who suffered mock  injuries, began weakl y 
moan ing to attract  the attention  of the owls. 
When  the owls saw this and rushed to kill  him, he pleaded,  “Sir, m y name  is Sthirajeevi  and I am  minister  of 
Meghavarna,  the king of crow s. Before  you kill me, I have something  to conve y to your king.”  
Arimard ana came to see the  minister  at once  and asked him  the reason for his plight.  Sthirajeevi  told him, 
“Our king  wanted  to avenge  the massacre  of his subjects by  your men.  When I knew he was bent upon  
waging  a war with y ou, I advised  him not to be rash and not  go to war with y ou. I asked hi m to sign peace 
with you. My king  thought that  I was on yo ur side and in  great anger  inflicted  these injuries on me.  As soon 
as I recover,  I will  show yo u where he and  his men  are hiding. You can  destroy them.”  The king of owls called  a meeting  of his elders and  his five min isters  for consultations.  He asked his first 
minister,  Raktaksha, “F riend,  our enem y’s minister is in our custody . What  shall we do with  him?”  
The minist er said, “What is there  to discuss?  Kill him instantl y without hesitation.  It is alwa ys better  to 
destro y the enem y before he  acquires strength.  Such opportunities  com e once  in a while.  If yo u lose it  now, 
you will never get  it back. Don’t be carried  away by Meghavarna’s minist er’s show of affection.  Because 
once  lost, love  never returns.”  
To drive home  the point,  Raktaksha  related  to the  king of owls the  story  of a cobra and  a Brahmin.  
 
4.The B rahm in and The C obra 
Haridatta  was a Brahmin  living  in a haml et. He was a farm er but the  piece  of land  he cultivat ed gave  him 
very little  to survive.  One day , unable  to stand  the heat  of the  summer sun, he went to  a big tree  in his land  to 
rest for a w hile. Before  he could  spread  himself  on the ground he  saw in the nearb y anthill  a huge  cobra 
sway ing with  his hood open. 
He thought,  “This cobra  must  reall y be the Goddes s of this  land. I have  never worshipped her,  which is w hy I 
am not able  to get  anything from  the land. From  toda y, I will  worship her.”  
At once  he went back  to his village  and returned  with a glass full  of milk.  
He poured it  in a bowl and turning  to the  anthill  said, “O  ruler  of the land,  I did not  know you were  living  in 
this anthill.  That  is why  I have not  paid m y tribute  to you. Please  excuse me  and accept  this humb le 
offering.”  
He then  placed  the bowl of m ilk at the anthill  and left  the place.  
Next  day when the Brahm in came to his land before  the Sun was up, he sa w a gold coin  in the  bowl he had 
left at the anthill.  Henceforth,  he cam e alone  every  dawn, collec ted the coin, offered  the milk  in the bowl and 
left. One da y the Brahmin,  leaving  for another  village  on business, asked his son to go to the  anthill  and offer 
milk. When  the son went the  next da y, he found a gold coin  in the  bowl. 
He collect ed the coin and  thought, “This anthill  must  be full  of gold. If I kill  the cobra, I can  collect  all the 
gold in one go instead  of coming  here ever y day.” 
He then  struck the  cobra with a  big stick.  But the  cobra deftl y dodged the  blow but stung the  son to  death 
with his poisonou s fangs. Returning  to his village  the next da y, Haridatta  heard the  story  of his son ’s death 
and at once  realized  that greed  was behind  it. The Brahmin  went to the  anthill  the day after  his son’ s cremation and offered  milk  to the  cobra. Without 
coming out of his hole, the  cobra told  Haridatta,  
“You have  come  here for gold forgetting  that you had lost a son and that  you were in  mourning.  The reason 
is greed,  pure greed.  From today , there  is no mean ing in our relationship.  Blinded  by his yo uth, your son has 
struck  me and I bit  him back. How can I forget  that blow ? How can  you suffer the  grief  of yo ur son’s death? 
Finall y, I am  giving  you this diamond,  don’t come  back again.”  
Ending  the story  of the Brahm in and the  cobra, Raktaksha  told Arimardana,  “The lesson is that love  once 
betra yed cannot  be regained.  If yo u kill this minist er (Sthirajeevi)  you will have no proble ms left.”  
After  listening  to Raktaksha  patientl y, the king  of owls turned  to his second m inister  Kruraksha and  asked 
him for his opinion.  
The second minist er said, “O  my lord, I don’t agree  with the  advice  Raktaksha  gave y ou. It is very  unkind. 
We should  never kill  a person seeking  asylum. There  is a fine  story about  how, knowing that  a hunter  who 
sought shelter  had in  fact come  to kill him,  a dove offered hi mself  as food to  the hunter.”  
On the  king asking him  to relate  that stor y, Kruraksha told  him the following  tale.  
Once upon a  time  there  lived  a merc iless hunter  in the  heart of a  forest, terrorizing  birds and  anima ls. 
Because  of his cruel  nature  he had no friends or relativ es. The elders  have said,  
“It is unwise to be close  to
Men who are wicked  and cruel.
Avoid such heinous persons as
You avoid  poisonou s snakes.” 
The hunter went  out into  the forest ever y morning  with a stick  and net.  One day, he threw his net  and trapped 
a female  dove in  it. Soon, thick  and black  clouds appeared  in the sky  and it  began raining  cats and dogs. 
Scared  and shivering,  the hunter  looked for shelter  and found it  under a  huge bany an tree.  The rain and  wind 
stopped  suddenl y. The skies beca me clear  with stars shining. The  hunter said  loudly , 
“If there is an yone on the tree,  I seek shelter  and food from  him.  I am  hungr y and ma y faint  any moment. 
Please  save me.”  
At the  same  time, a dove that  had his nest  on the same  tree was worried that  his wife who had gone  out had 
not come  back.  He pray ed to Gods that  his wife should not  come  to any harm  in this wind and rain.  He began 
telling  himself,  
“Bles sed and happy  is the  man
With  a caring  and loving  wife.
A home  is not a home  without a  wife;A wifeless home  is like  a jungle.”  
The wife trapped  in the  hunter’s net  heard her husband’s s orrowful words and, happ y that her husband loved  
her so much,  thought, 
“Don’t call  her a woman
Whose husband is unhapp y;
Where  happy  husbands live
Heavens shower blessings.” 
Later,  addressing  her husband, the fem ale dove said, “Listen to  me, my dear. Even  at the  cost of y our life, 
you must  come  to the rescue  of someone  seeking  shelter.  This hunter is suffering  from  cold  and hunger and 
has sought shelter  under our tree.  You must  serve him  with devotion.  Don’t hate  him because he  has trapped 
your beloved  wife. In realit y, the strings of destin y have  bound me.  Give up all  thoughts  of revenge and  serve 
the hunter with  care.”  
In accordance  with his wife’s desire, the  dove suppressed grief and  told the  hunter, “Sir, yo u are welco me to 
our modest  home.  Please  let me know what I can  do for yo u. Treat  this as own home  and feel free to 
command me.” 
The hunter told  the dove that  he was s uffering  from  cold  and needed  relief.  The dove  flew out, brought  fire 
from  somewher e and a  lit a small  fire with  dry twigs and asked the  hunter to  warm himself.  
The dove told  the hunter,  “Because  of m y past deeds,  I am  born poor and unfortunate  and do not have 
enough  to feed m yself. What  is the point  in a host living  if he cannot  entertain  a guest ? It is better  he 
renounce  this world.”  
Yet he thought that  it was better  to die  than sa y no to  a ho st. Determin ed to die, the  dove told  the hunter  to 
wait for a while  and that  soon he will have  food. Then circling  over the  fire, the  dove jumped  into the fire  he 
lit for the  benefit  of the  hunter. 
Moved b y this sacrifice,  the hunter  told himself,  “I am responsible  for this traged y. I will  no doubt go to hell.  
This dove is a great  soul, he has sho wn me  the right path.  Hereafter,  I will give  up all  wants and desires and  
slowly  destro y this body . Nothing, neither  cold  nor sun nor wind, matt ers to me.  I will fast  and see m y slow 
end.”  
The hunter then  threw his net  and stick  and released  the fe male  dove from  the net. 
The wife then  saw how her husband had jumped  into the fire to provide  food for the  hunter. She thought  that 
life without  her husband was w orse than  death  and at once  jumped  into the same  fire that  consumed  her 
husband. After her  death,  she saw her husband in  the heaven  wearing ro yal regalia.  
On seeing her,  the husband said, “O  my darling,  you have done well  to follow  me into the fire.  Women  like you live happil y with their  husbands for 35 mil lion years.” 
The dove couple  lived  happil y ever after.  The hunter, shunning worldly  pleasures,  went to a  forest for 
realiz ing God. A s penance  had cleansed  him of all  desires, the  hunter burnt  himself  in a forest fire  and 
attain ed nirvana.  
After  Kruraksha ended  telling  the king the  hunter’s stor y, Arimardan a asked a  third min ister,  Deeptaksha  for 
his advice  on dealing  with Sthirajeevi.  
The minist er told the king,  “My lord, Sthirajeevi  does not deserve to  be killed.  He will  be of use to us in 
revealing  the secrets  of the ene my. There  is this stor y of how even a  thief  could help  an old man. ” 
On the  king comm anding him, Deeptaksha  began telling  him the story of the  old man,  his yo ung wife and the 
thief.  
 
5.The Old Man, His  Young Wife and T he Thief  
There  lived  an old  wido wed m erchant  in a cit y in the south. Though  old, he did not  give-up his desire  for 
another  wife. Therefore,  he gave lots of mon ey to a poor merchan t and marr ied his y oung daughter.  She 
never  loved her  old husband. One day , when the  husband and  wife were sleeping  on different  sides of the 
bed, a thief  entered  their  house. Shocked  by the sight  of the thief,  the wife embra ced her husband  in fear. 
The husband  was both  thrilled  and surprised b y the embra ce and began thinking  about  what made  her do so. 
He searched  every  nook and  corner of the  house and at last  found the  thief  lurking in  a corner. He then 
realized  that his wife had embr aced him because  the thief  had frightened  her. The  husband  told the  thief,  “My 
dear young man,  toda y I had the  fortune of being  hugged b y my wife. Thanks to y ou. Take  away  whatever 
you want.”  
The thief  replied,  “My dear sir, I do not  find any thing in your house that  I could  take with  me. But I will 
come back  soon and  see if there  is any thing to carr y away . Or, you could  call whenever  you need love  from 
your wife.”  
“That is wh y,” Deeptaksha  said, “w hen even  a thief  could  do s ome good for someone,  why not this 
Sthirajeevi  who has s ought  asylum? He will  give  us useful  informat ion about  the handicaps  of the  enem y. 
Therefore,  in my view he should not  be killed.”  
Then  Arimardana  turned to  another  minister,  Vakranasa, and asked  him,  “Tell  me what  should  we do with 
this crow ?” Vakranasa told  him that “the refugee’s  life should  be spared because  it ma y benefit  us w hen two 
rivals  fight  each other  like the quarrel  between  a thief  and a  monster  had saved  the life  of a Brahm in and his 
two calves.”  
“How wa s that?”  asked the  owl king. Vakranasa  narrated  him the following  story . 
Drona was a poor Brahmin  who wa s living  in a small  town. He wa s so poor that  he never  wore good clothes, 
or used cosme tics, or indulged  in the luxur y of eating  apaan(betel  leaves).He had mat ted hair,  an unshaven 
beard  and uncut  nails. He was extrem ely weak  and emac iated because  he had no cover  from  cold,  sun or 
wind or rain.  Taking  pity on hi m, a rich  man  donated  two calves  to hi m. 
With  all care  and love,  he fed the m well  with butter  oil and gras s. The  calves  grew into two fine  and health y 
animals.  A thief  set his e yes on the m and decided  that he should somehow  steal  them.  As he set out  for the 
Brahm in’s house, he saw on the wa y an awesome  figure with  loose teeth  as long and  sharp as fangs, an 
arched  nose and blood- red ey es. He had a lean  body with  varicose veins  and his hair and  beard looked  like 
two torches.  
Though  he wa s frightened,  the thief  asked him,  “Who are  you, sir?” 
“I am  Satyavachana,  a monster.  Let m e know w ho you are.”  
“I am  a thief.  My name  is K roorakar ma. I am  going to  steal  the calves  of the  Brahmin.”  
The monster  trusted  the words of the thief  and told him  that he took onl y one mea l a da y in the  evening and 
that he would kill  the Brahmin  for his dinner.  
Both  of them  went to the  Brahmin’s  house that  night  and waited  for the Brahm in to go to sleep. When  they 
were sure that  the Brahmin  had slept,  the monster  stepped in  to kill  the poor Brahmin.  The thief  held hi m 
back  saying it was unju st to kill  the Brahmin  before he (the  thief)  could take  away the two calves.  
The monster  said,  “If the sound of the  resisting calves  disturbs the  sleep of the  Brahmin,  all our effort will  be 
in vain.” 
The thief  replied,  “Suppose there  is some obstacle  in your killing  him,  I cannot  take  the calves. Therefore, 
wait till I finish  my job first.”  
The thief  and the  monster  began  quarrelling  about  who should be  the first  to finish his job. 
The Brahmin  woke up due to the  comm otion they were mak ing and asked the m who the y were and what was  
the matter. 
The thief  told hi m, “This monster  wants to kill  you.” 
The monster  denied  and said,  “O Brahmin,  this thief  wants to steal  your calves.”  The Brahmin  then invoked  his deit y through pra yer and the power of the  pray er forced  the monster  to flee. 
The Brahmin  then took  a stick and  drove off the  thief. 
“That is wh y,” Vakranasa  said, “ I had told  you that if two rivals  quarrel  among  themselves,  we would be  the 
beneficiar ies.” Then  the king asked his fourth m inister,  Prakarakarna  for his opinion. 
The minist er said, “My  lord,  I think we should spare the  life of the crow. It  is po ssible  that he will  co-operate 
with us and  that will  be a  gain for us. Where  there is no co- operation,  people  will perish  like the  two snakes.” 
The king said, “In that  case, let  us hear that  story .” 
 
6.The T ale of T wo Snakes 
Once upon a  time  there  was a king named  Devasakti.  He had  a son w ho was very  weak and  growing  weaker 
by the day. It was found that  he had a  snake  in his stoma ch. Experts,  physicians and surgeons tried  to nurse 
him back to  health  without  success. Dejected,  the son left  his palace  one night and took  shelter  in a lonel y 
and dilapidated  templ e in another  town ruled  by a monarch  called  Bali.  Ever y day, the son would go out  to 
beg and return to  the te mple  in the  night. 
King Bali  had two daughters  who came  of age. Following  a tradition,  the two daughters  would get up ever y 
dawn and touch  the feet of their  father  in reverence.  
One da y, after  paying respects to  the king  one of his daughters said,  “Victory  to the king.  We are  happy  in 
every way .” 
The second daughter  said, “O  king, reap  the harvest  of yo ur actions.”  
The king, ver y angr y at the  words of the  second daughter,  called  his min isters  and told  them,  “Take  this foul-
mouth ed woman  away and marr y her off to some  stranger.  Let her reap the  consequences  of her actions.”  
In comp liance with  the orders of the  king, the  ministers  took her awa y and married  her without  pomp  or 
ceremony to Devasakti’s son living  in the  old temp le. The daughter  considered  the king’s son as G od’s gift 
and after persuading  him,  left for another  countr y. 
The princess and the  son of Devasakti  reached  a cit y where  they  camp ed close  to a lake.  She asked her 
husband to  take care  of the  camp  and went into  the cit y with  her maids  to buy daily needs like  rice,  salt, 
butter  oil and vegetables.  After  shopping,  she returned to  the lake  where she saw a surprising spectacle.  
The prince  was sleeping,  resting  his head on an anthill.  The serpent  in his stoma ch cam e out to breath  fresh 
air. Then another  serpent  emerged  from  the anthill  for the  same  reason.  Both of them  glared  at each  other.  The anthill  inmate  said, “Y ou wicked  creature,  why  do yo u torment  such a handsome  prince.”  
The other serpent  retorted,  “Why are you polluting  the two golden urns in y our hole.”  
Thus in  their row, the y revealed  the secrets of each  other. 
The serpent in  the anthill  told the  other  serpent, “D on’t be  arrogant. Who  does not  know the  secret  of yo ur 
death? If the  prince  drinks a concoction  mad e of gruel  and mustard  you will die  unsung.” 
“Oh, is that  so? You will also  perish if someone  pour s hot  oil or hot  water in y our anthil l. Don’t be too 
proud,”  said the serpent  in the  prince’s stoma ch. 
The princess, who heard all  that passed between  the two serpents, poured  hot oil  into the  anthill  and took the 
two golden  urns and gave the  mustard  concoction  to her husband and  killed  the serpent  inside  his stomach. 
Both  Divy asakti’s son and his daughter- in-law returned  to his kingdom  and lived  happil y ever  after.  
After  listening  to this stor y, owl king  Arimardana  accepted  his advice  that Sthirajeevi’s  life should be spared. 
Raktaksha,  the first minist er, was sad and told  the min isters,  "You have misl ed the king b y giving  wrong 
advice  and paved the  way  for his destruction.  The learned  have  said that  where wicked  men  are honoured and 
wise men  are insulted,  there  will be fear, fa mine  and death.”  
Disregarding  the warning  of Raktaksha, the  king’s men  set out to take  Sthirajeevi  to their  fortress. 
On the  way, Sthirajeevi  said,  “My lord, in m y condition,  I cannot  be of any  help  to you. Why do y ou 
unnecessaril y carry me to the fortress?  I will  jump  into a  fire and  perish. Please perm it me to do that.”  
Sensing his internal  thoughts, Raktaksha  asked him  why he would want to end up in  fire. 
Sthirajeevi  said, “It is for y our cause I m et this fate in the hands of Meghavarna.”  
Raktaksha  said, “Y ou are  a cheat,  good at  spinning  word s. You were reall y born as a crow and  even if y ou 
are born as an owl in y our next  birth,  you will still  be a  crow in nature.  Haven’t y ou heard  the stor y of the 
mouse,  which even when she was born as a girl  in another  birth, chose  to marr y not a human  being but 
another  male mouse?”  
The minist ers and other  king’ s men pressed Raktaksha  to tell  them that story. 
T here  was a hermit age belonging  to the sage Salanka yana. He went one morning  to river  Ganga to bathe.  As 
he was reciting  stanzas in praise  of the Sun, he saw a kite  carrying a mouse  in its claws. At once,  the sage aimed a stone at  the kite.  Hit b y the stone, the  kite released  its pre y and the mouse  at once ran  to the  sage 
asking  him for protection.  
The kite addressed Salanka yana and said,  “O sage, you have hit  me with  a stone, which  is not proper. Are 
you not afraid of God?  Surrender  that mouse  to me  or yo u will go to  hell.”  
The sage said, “Y ou wretched  bird, m y duty  is to save God’s creations,  to punish the  wicked, to respect  the 
good, to  honor the teacher  and w orship the  God s. Wh y do yo u preach all  those irrelevan t rules of conduct  to 
me?”  
The kite delivered  a big  lecture  to the  sage on the  right path.  “You have no idea  of what  is good and w hat is 
bad. God created  all of us and at  the time  of creation  also prescribed  what should be  our food. G od has 
mark ed mice, other  rodents and insects  to be food for us. Wh y do y ou blame me for seeking  what God has 
meant for m e? There  is nothing  wrong for an yone to eat  the food marked  for hi m. The danger comes  when 
one eats what is not  food for him.  What  is mea t for someone  is poison for s omeon e else.”  
“It is not proper for sages to  be violent.  They are not presumed  to notice  what  is happening  around them. 
They are detached  from  this world. Nothing  that happens in the  mater ial world should  interest  them.  They 
should not  discrimin ate between vice  and virtue. The y are above  every thing. But b y your deed  toda y you 
have  lost all  the gains of yo ur penance.  Learn  from  this stor y of three  brothers how to attain  that state  of 
detach ment.” 
Salanka yana asked the kite  to relate  that story  to him.  The kite  told him the following  story . 
 
7.The W edding of The Mouse 
Once upon a  time,  three  sages, w ho were also  brothers, chose a riverbank  to do penance.  Their nam es were 
Ekata,  Dwita  and Trita.  The clothes the y washed every  day used to dry  in the  sky without  a clotheslin e lest 
they should drop and becom e soiled.  One day a kite  was carry ing a femal e frog like  I (the  kite)  carried  a 
female mouse.  
Ekata  saw this and  shouted  at the  kite,  “Leave it,  Leave  it.” 
At once  his clothes  drying in the  sky dropped do wn to  the ground. 
When  Dwita saw this, he shouted at  the kite, “D on’t leave  it, Don’t leave  it” and soon his clothes  also ca me 
down hurtling.  
When  Trita  saw that  the clothes  of his elder  brothers fell  down, he  thought it  would be better  not to sa y anything and re mained  silent.  That  is w hy it is better  not to  notice  the happenings around and  concentrate  on 
self. 
The sage Salanka yana replied,  “O foolish  kite,  your story  has happened in  the Age of Truth  when even if y ou 
spoke to  a wicked person y ou beca me a sinner. The  clothes ca me down because  the first  two sages addres sed 
the wicked kite.  We are now living  in the  Age of Kali, an  age in which  every one is a born sinner. In this age  
only those who comm it a sin beco me sinners and  not those who speak to sinners. Now, don’t wa ste my time. 
Disperse or face  my curse.”  
The kite flew away  disappointed.  
The femal e mouse  then  prayed Salankay ana, “O sage, please  give me  shelter  in your hermi tage.  Otherwise, 
some  wicked bird will  kill me. I will spend the  rest of m y life with  whatever  leftovers  you choose to  feed me 
with.”  
The femal e mouse’s  prayer moved  the sage but he thought  that if he  took her home,  people  would laugh at 
him. So, he turned  the mouse  into a beautiful  girl and  took her home.  
“What is this  you have brought,”  asked the sage’s wife. Where  did y ou bring  this girl  from?”  
“She is a femal e mouse.  She needed  protection  from  wicked  birds. That’s why  I turned her into  a girl  and 
brought  her home.  You will  need to  shower all  care  on her. I will  make  her a mouse  again,”  said the sage. 
“Please don’t do that,”  pleaded  his wife, “ You have saved her  life and therefore  you have beco me her father. 
I don’t  have a child.  Since  you are her  father, she beco mes my daughter.”  The sage accepted  her plea.  
The girl grew into  a beautiful  woman and beca me an eligible  bride. Salanka yana told his wife,  “The girl  has 
come of age.  It is not proper  for her to rema in in our hou se. The learned  have  said, 
He who keeps an eligibl e bride  in his house
Forfeits  a place  in heaven.  So do his ancestors. 
“It’s all right.  Look for a  boy,” said his wife. 
Salanka yana imm ediately sum moned  the Sun and  told him,  “This is m y daughter.  If she is willing  to marr y 
you, get ready  to marr y her.”  
He then  showed the  Sun to his daughter  and asked her  if she w ould marr y him. She said that  the Sun w as 
very hot and she would prefer  someon e else.  The sage then  summoned the God of Clouds, the God of Wind  
and the God of M ountains.  The girl rejected  every  one of them  on one ground or the other.  Then  the God of Mountains told  the sage, “The most  suitable  candidate  for yo ur daughter is a  mouse.  He is 
more  powerful than  I am.”  
The sage then  turned her into  a mouse  and gave her  away to a king  of mice  in marr iage.  
“That’s why ,” Raktaksha  resumed,  “I want  you know that  a crow is a  crow and cannot  become  an owl.” 
Yet, disregarding Raktaksha’s  warnings, the king’s men  took away  Sthirajeevi  to their  fortress not  knowing 
that they were bringing  ruin upon themse lves and the  king. Sthirajeevi  thought  on the wa y to his destination, 
“This man  (Raktaksha)  alone  advised the  king to  kill me. Of all  of the king’s men  he alone  know s statecraf t. 
If the y had heeded  his word and killed  me the king  would have escaped  disaster.” 
When  Sthirajeevi’s procession arrived  at the entrance  of the fortress, king  Arimardana  ordered his men  to 
accommodate him in a comfortab le place  of his choice.  But Sthirajeevi  had other  ideas. If he  had to hatch  a 
plan to kill  the king, it  was not  possible  within  the fort  because he and  his movem ents would be constantl y 
under  watch.  That  would alert  his hosts. S o, he  thought, it  was better  to be outside  the fort. 
He told  the king,  “My lord, I am  grateful  for yo ur generosit y. But I am  a politician  and belong  to the  enem y 
camp. Yet I am  your devotee  and faithful  servant.  It does not  become  of me  to live inside the  palace.  I will 
stay at the  entrance  of the  fort and ever y day sanctif y my body with the  dust of y our feet.”  
The king of owls accepted  his request  and let  him stay where he wanted  to. The  king’s men  took 
extraordinar y care of his needs  and very  soon Sthirajeevi  becam e as strong as a wrestler.  Seeing Sthirajeevi’s  
new personalit y, Raktaksha  told the king  and other  ministers,  “I regard all  of you as ver y unwise. Haven’t 
you heard  the learned  often  repeating  the word s of the  bird Sindhuka? The bird  used to say , "“First, I am  a 
fool. Then the  hunter and  then the  king and his min isters.”  
“How wa s that?”  asked the  ministers  and Raktaksha began  telling  them  the story of Sindhuka. 
8.Tale of The Golden  Droppings  
On a big  tree in  the lap  of a mount ain lived  a bird named  Sindhuka. His droppings u sed to turn into  gold as 
soon as they  hit the ground. O ne day, a hunter  came  to the  tree in search of pre y and sa w Sindhuka’s 
droppings hit  the ground and turn into  gold. 
The hunter, struck  by wonder,  thought, “I  have  been hunting  birds and smal l animals  since  I was a boy . I am 
now eight y years old. I have  never seen  in m y life this kind  of mirac le.” 
He decided  to get the  bird some  how and set  a noo se for him.  Not aware  of the trap,  the bird stay ed on the 
branch  merri ly singing. Soon, the  noose tightened  and the  hunter  caught the  bird and  pushed hi m into his cage.  
The hunter took  it home  and considered,  “If the  king comes  to know of this wonder, he will  certainl y take 
away the bird from  me. Instead,  I will go to  the king  and present the  unique  bird to him. ” 
The hunter took  the bird  the following  day to the  king and  presented it  to hi m with great  reverence.  The king 
was extrem ely happy  and told  his men  to keep the  bird in safe  custody  and feed  him with  the best bird  food. 
But his minister  was reluctan t to accept  the bird.  
He said, “O  Rajah, There  is no use in trusting  the word of this  hunter and accept ing the bird. Has any one seen 
a bird dropping gold? Therefore,  I request y ou to release  the bird from  the cage.”  
The king ordered  the bird  to be set free.  As soon as the door of the  cage  opened, the  bird perched  himself  on 
a nearby  doorway  and defecated.  The dropping  imm ediately turned  into gold. Sindhuka then  recited  that line 
about  fools, “ First, I was a fool. Then  the hunter  and then  the king  and his min isters.”  
Raktaksha  continued,  “That’s why  I tell  you that we are all  fools in sparing  the life  of this m inister  of the 
crows, Sthirajeevi.”  Despite  Raktaksha’s warnings, the owls continued  to look after  Sthirajeevi  with great 
devotion.  The crow minister  becam e strong and powerful.  Giving up all  hopes of reforming  his king and 
ministers,  Raktaksha  called  his close  colleagues  and told  them, 
“Friends,  our king and his men  are be yond refor m. We have  given  whatever  advice  a minister  has to give. 
We shall now leave  this dangerous  place  and pitch  our tents elsewhere.  The elders have  said, “He prospers 
who anticipa tes danger and  escapes it.  He w ho does not  destroys himself.”  I have been  living  in this jungle 
for so long, I have  become  old. Yet, in  all my life I have never  heard a  cave speaking  like a human  being.”  
“What, a  cave speaking  like a human  being! Surprising. We  have never  heard of it.  Please tell  us all about  it,” 
asked his followers.  
Raktaksha  then  told the m the following stor y. 
Deep in  the rain  forest lived  a lion  named  Kharanakara.  One day, he was very  hungr y and looked  for a pre y 
in every  nook and corner  of the forest.  There was no anim al, big or small,  as far as he could  see. A s he was 
wandering  in search  of food he found a big cave  and thought,  “There must  be some anim al living  here.  If so, 
it is bound to return  to the  cave  in the evening.  I will  hide  myself in the  cave  and when the  anima l returns, 
pounce  on him  and have a good m eal.” 
Then  as sun began  to set, Dadhiputcha,  a jackal,  came to the cave  that was his home  and saw the  footprints of 
the lion entering  the cave.  There  were, however, no traces  of footprints  to sho w that  the lion had  left. Scared, 
the jackal wanted  to mak e sure that  it was a lion  or some  big anima l that went into  the cave. But  how should 
he know? He hit  upon a brillian t idea.  
The jackal  went  near the  cave and  began shouting, “Hello cave,  I am  your friend here.”  There  was no repl y from  the cave.  He did not  know what to  do. He again  shouted,  “Hello  cave, don’t  you remem ber the 
arrange ment  we made?  I have to  shout when I arrive at  the cave and  you will ask me  to come  in. Without 
your green  signal I do not  enter  the cave.  Since y ou are silent,  I will  go to some  other  cave.”  
The lion heard  the jackal  speaking  and thought, “A h, there  seems  to be an arrange ment  between  the cave  and 
this anima l. Let me get him  into my trap. I will  shout back  a welcome  to him  and he will  walk in  happil y.” 
The lion then  roared,  “Hi jackal,  com e in. You are  welcome.”  
The jackal  at once knew it  was a lion inside  the cave and  hurriedl y fled the  place,  reme mbering  the lines  of 
the learned,  
“He survives who anticipa tes a danger  and acts  to avert  it,
He who does not comes  to grief.”  
Raktaksha  said, “That is how we must  also anticipate  danger and  act. Let  us leave  now before it  is too late.”  
Listening  to his advice,  his minist ers and others followed  him to a far off place.  
Seeing  that the ma in obstacle  in his way  has disappeared  and that  the rem aining  king’s men  were all  stupid, 
Sthirajeevi  began  piling  up twigs on the pretext  of building  a nest. He heaped  them  at the  entrance  of the  cave 
in which the king  and other  owls lived.  When  the pile  was big enough, he  waited  for da ybreak when the  owls 
would beco me blind.  Then  he flew off to Meghavarna  and told  him that before word could reach  the enem y 
camp of this plan,  he and  his followers s hould  accomp any him (Sthirajeevi)  each carr ying a piece  of burning 
wood. 
Accordingl y, Meghavarna  and his men  followed Sthirajeevi,  each  carry ing a burning twig  in his beak. When 
they reached  the entrance  of the cave,  which was now blocked b y the pile of twigs Sthirajeevi  built,  they 
threw  the burning twigs on the  pile,  which began  to burn fiercel y killing  all the owls trapped  inside. 
When  Megahvarna and  his men  returned  to their  kingdom,  he asked Sthirajeevi  to tell him how he could  plan 
to kill the ene my. 
Sthirajeevi  said, “It was not an eas y job living  in the  enem y camp.  Luckil y, except  Raktaksha, ever y one of 
Arimard ana’s  minist ers was a fool. Yet it  was like walking  on the  edge of a sword. But if y ou want  to 
achieve  your goal y ou will have to  put up with all  inconvenienc e and disco mfort  like the snake which carried  
the frogs on its back.”  9.Frogs That Rode a Snake 
A black  snake  named  Mandavishy a lived  in a forest on the  Varuna  hills. He was becom ing old and  worried 
that he would not  be able  to snare frogs an y more  and that  would make  him weak and bring his end  closer. 
With  a plan  in his head,  he went to  a lake  and resting  on its edge pretended  that he had lost all  interest  in 
worldl y matt ers. 
A frog in the  lake  came  out and asked  him,  “Uncle,  why  are y ou not pre ying for food as used yo u to do in  the 
past?” 
The snake  said, “Listen, m y son, I am  very  unfortunate.  How can I have  any fervor for food?  Last  night  when 
I was on m y rounds looking  for food I sighted a frog. When  I tried  to get  at him,  he jumped  into the m iddle 
of a group of Brahmins  reciting  the Vedas. I could  not track  him.  But soon I saw something  like a frog near 
the Brahmins  and at once  jumped  at hi m and bit  him.  It turned  out to be the  thumb  of a Brahmin  boy. The 
boy died  immediately.” 
“When his father  found that  I had killed  his son, he cursed me,  “You wicked snake, y ou have  killed  my 
innocent  son. From  now onward s you will serve as a vehicle  for all  frog s. Your life  will be at  their m ercy.” I 
have  now decided  to serve m y sentence.  That  is why  I am  here,”  said the  snake. 
The frog ran into  the lake  and told  ever y one about the  snake and his offer  to serve as a vehicle.  Happy  at the 
prospect,  all the frogs went and m et their  king  Jalapada  and told  him about  the snake.  “What  a wonderful 
news,” thought  the king  and trooped  out of the lake  with  his ministers  and s ubjects. The  king was the first  to 
get on to the  hood of the snake,  followed b y his min isters.  In the  order of seniorit y and prominen ce, the 
kings’ sub jects also cli mbed  the back  of the snake. Those  unfortunate  frog s that  could  not find  space on the 
vehicle  followed the  snake in a  proces sion.  To entertain  them,  Mandavishy a showed several feats  he could 
do. 
Thrilled  by the experience  of riding  a deadl y snake,  Jalapada,  the king  of the frogs, thought  that the ride  had 
no paralle l. No ride, whether  on an elephant  or a horse or a chariot  or a palanquin,  can match this experienc e, 
he thought. 
On the  second  day, Mandavishy a slowed down the  pace of his haul.  Noticing  the change  of pace,  Jalapada 
asked the  snake why  he was not moving  as briskly  as he used to. The  snake told  the king  of frog s that  he had 
no food that  day and being weak he  was not  able to  carry  so much  load. 
Jalapada,  taking  pity on the snake,  said, “ You can have  the y ounger frog s for y our food.”  
Thrilled  at this  offer, the  snake  said, “ O king of frogs, m y plight  is due to  the curse  the Brahm in gave  me. 
Your magnan imous concession  has released  me toda y from  the curse. I am  so happy .” The snake  thus began eating  a few frog s ever y day and soon beca me strong and  health y. He wa s also  worried 
that if he began eating  the frogs at that  rate there  would not be an y frog s left  for him  in the  future. 
Meanwhile,  a big  cobra chanced  to co me that way and seeing  the snake  carry ing the frogs and struck b y 
wonder asked the  snake, “This is very  unique though  unnatural.  How is it  you have beco me a vehicle  for 
frogs which are  our natural  food ?” 
“That’s a long  story  resembling  the stor y of the  Brahmin  who pretended  to have beco me blind  after  eating 
the good food his wife had mad e,” said Mandavishy a. 
The cobra asked the  snake to  relate  that story . 
Once upon a  time,  a Brahm in named  Yagnadatta  lived  in a cit y. He had a wife who was not trustworthy . She 
had a lover to  whom she would secretl y send every  day delicious  food s he m ade. One da y, her husband  found 
out what she wa s doing.  
He asked her,  “My dear, y ou are making  ever y day some  special  dish or the other  and taking  it out of the 
house. Tell  me, what is the  truth.”  
With  great  presence  of mind,  she told  Yagnadatta,  “Every  day I am  fasting and  taking  this food to offer  to the 
Goddess.” To alla y suspicion, she collec ted food and  telling  her husband that  she was leaving  for the  templ e, 
left home.  The husband began  following her  secretl y and when she went to the  tank  to bathe,  he went to  the 
temple  of the Goddess and hid behind  the idol.  
After  taking bath  in the  tank,  the Brahm in’s wife came  to the  temp le from  the tank  and began  pray ing the 
Goddess, “ O mother, tell me how can I render  my husband blind?” 
The Brahmin,  hiding behind  the idol, changed  his voice  and said, “O  great  devotee,  you feed  your husband 
daily with  good and delicious  food. Very  soon he will beco me blind.” 
From  then  onwards, the wife began  feeding  her husband with delicac ies. Soon, the Brah min comp lained to 
the wife that  he was not able  to see  clearl y. The wife  thought that  the Godde ss had at  last fulfilled  her desire.  
Encouraged  by the Brahmin’s  blindness,  his wife’s lover began  visiting  her without  any fear. One da y, 
Yagnadatta  saw him  and his wife together.  The lover  ignored him  thinking  the Brah min was blind. 
Yagnadatta  then thrashed  the lover  so hard that  he died.  The Brahmin  then  cut the  nose of his wife. 
“That’s why ,” Mandavishy a told the cobra, “I  am pretending  to be  friendl y with the frogs.” Jalapada,  the king 
of frogs overheard  this conversation  and asked  Mandavish ya if what  he had heard  was true.  The snake at 
once  realized  his m istake  and told  the king of frogs that  it was all fun. The  king of frogs foolishly  believed 
the word s of the  snake  and the  snake  slowly  swallowed  all the frog s. Sthirajeevi  told Meghavarna  that he  followed the  tactics  of Mandavish ya in misle ading  his enemies.  Pleased, 
the king of crows said, “W hat you have  said is correct.  Great men  do not give  up what the y have begun even 
in the face  of obstacles.  Cowards, afraid  of failure,  do not  venture at  all. There  are some  that begin  a task and 
give it up w hen there  is a problem.  But courageous people  do not give  up whatever  dangers they  face.”  
“You (Sthirajeevi)  have  crushed the ene mies  and brought securit y to m y kingdom.  The learned  have said,  
“It is dangerous to leave
A fire  unextinguished
A debt  unredeemed
An enem y uncrushed and
A disease untreated. ” 
Sthirajeevi  said, “My  lord,  virtue  belongs to him  who is charitable,  learned,  courageous and friendl y. Virtue 
brings wealth.  Wealth  brings power. It  is a king with  these qualities  who can  rule and  expand his kingdom.  I 
have  done m y duty. I need rest. But  I humbl y seek  to offer one word of advice.  All this power s hould  not go 
to your head. Follow the  path of dut y and rule  your subjects for a hundred  years. May  God bless y ou.” 
This is the end of the  third  strategy  Vishnu Sarma  disclosed to  his roy al wards. 
 
Fourth Strateg y: Loss Of Gains: 
Vishnu  Sarma begins his fourth  Tantra with  the following  stanza: 
“He overcomes all  problem s
Who does not lose  his cool
Even  in the  face  of adversity
Like the monkey  in the  water.” 
1.The C roc and The Monke y 
Rakta mukha  was a monke y living  on a blackberr y tree near  the coast.  That  tree was alwa ys full of fruits. One 
day a crocodile  nam ed Karalam ukha  came out of the waters  and loitering  on the  sands came  to the  tree. Seeing  the croc,  the monke y said, “O  croc,  you are m y guest. I will  feed y ou with these  delicious 
blackberries.  Enjoy the fare. The  learned  have  said, 
“That man  is blessed who ho sts
A lover  or an enem y or a fool.
Angels will  desert the  home
That fails  to host a guest.”  
The monke y then  gave the  crock  a lot of berries.  After he had  his fill,  Karalamukh a went home.  Thereafter,  it 
became a habit  with the  croc to  daily  visit  Rakta mukha,  enjoy the fruit he  offered, spend ti me with  him 
discussing the  world and then  go home.  
One da y, the croc’s wife asked  her hu sband,  “Where  do yo u get this  fruit, the y are so s weet.  I have  never 
tasted  such mouth- watering  fruit.” 
“I have a close  friend, a  monke y, who gives me  the fruit  every  day,” said the  husband.  
“If the fruit  are so s weet,  the heart  of yo ur friend who eats the m ever yday must  be as delicious  as the fruit. 
Please  get his heart  for me,  if you have  love left  for me.  I will alwa ys be yo ung and im mortal if I eat  that 
fruit,”  said the  wife. 
“My dear,  it is i mproper  for y ou to speak  like that.  I have accepted  him as m y brother. It  is not pos sible  for 
me to kill  such a host. Please  be reasonable.  The elders have  said, 
“From mother  we get  our first relativ e,
A good word brings the second relativ e
Who is mor e precious  than a brother.”  
Angry , the wife said, “Y ou have never  defied  my word. It must  be a fema le monke y who is yo ur friend. 
That’s  why you are spending so much  time with him  every  day. I have  now under stood  you thoroughly . Your 
heart  is full  of that  monke y. You are a  cheat.”  
Karala mukha,  wanting to  pacify  his wife,  said, “ “My dear,  why are you angry ? I am  your most  obedient 
servant  and read y to carry  out your order at  any time.” 
“No, she is dear  to yo u. If yo u reall y love  me, why  don’t y ou kill her and  get me  her heart.  If yo u don’t get  it, 
I will  fast and die,”  threatened  the wife. 
Worried,  the croc went to  the monke y. Seeing that  the croc was late  for his dail y mee ting, Raktamukh a said, 
“You are  late and do not seem  to be  cheerful.  What’s the  matt er?” 
“O my friend, how can I tell  you what happened  at home.  My wife  is very  angry . She told  me that I am  an ungrateful  friend  and that  ever y day I eat  the fruit  you offer but  never had the  courtesy  of inviting  you home. 
You have no rede mption ; she told  me and warned me  that if I did not bring  you home,  I would see her  only 
in the other  world. These argum ents with her  have dela yed me. Please com e with m e. My wife has decorated  
the house fit to  receive  you. She has hung welcom e buntings at  the entrance.  She is eagerl y waiting  for me  to 
bring  you home.”  
The monke y said,  “Your wife has said the  proper thing. You should leave  a man who loves yo u for yo ur 
wealth  like the spider  attracts  his pre y. She might  as well  have  quoted the  elders sa ying, 
“Where there  is no give  and take
Where  there  is no exchange  of secrets
And of hospitalit y either
There  is no true  friendship.” 
“There is a  problem,  however.  We are  all land  anim als. You live  in water.  It ma y not be pos sible  for me  to 
accept  your kind invitation.  I advise y ou to bring her here,”  said the  monke y. 
“It’s reall y no problem,”  said the  croc. “O ur house is on a sandbank. It’s a  beautiful  place.  Sit on m y back. I 
will carry  you.” 
The monke y happil y sat on the back  of the croc  and the  journey  began.  As the croc was entering  deep waters, 
the monke y got scared and told  the croc to  go slo wly. 
Thinking  that the monke y was his prisoner now, Karalamukh a told Raktamukh a, “It is no w safe  to tell  you 
our plan.  My wife wanted me  to create  trust in y ou first and persuade y ou to accept  our invitation  and then 
kill you so that  we ma y have  the good fortune  of feasting  on yo ur heart.”  
With  great  presence  of mind,  the monke y said,  “My friend, if  this is what y ou and y our wife  wanted, why 
didn’t  you tell me in the  beginning  itself? My  heart  is safel y stored in the  burro w of the  tree.  What  is the use 
of your taking  me home  without  my heart? Let  us go back. There  is nothing  happier  for me  than  giving  my 
heart  to your wife.”  Happy , the croc  turned  back and brought  the monke y to the  shore.  
The monke y at once leapt  to the  top of the blackberr y tree and  thought, “We should not trust  an 
untrustworth y person, even if we did,  it should not  be total.  Such trust will  destro y us compl etely. This is a 
rebirth  for me. ” 
The croc was in a hurr y and asked the monk ey, “What is the  delay ? Get yo u heart.  My wife  will be  very 
happ y.” 
The monke y angril y told him,  “You idiot,  have y ou seen an yone who has two hearts? You are ungrateful.  Get 
out of m y sight and  never come  this wa y again.  People  who are  hungry  stoop to an y level  like Priyadarsan a.” 
The croc asked hi m to tell  the stor y of Pri yadarsan a. Rakta mukha  told hi m the following stor y. 
 
2.The Greedy  Cobra and The King  Of Frogs 
A big well  was the home  of Gangadatta,  king of frogs. Unable to  bear harassmen t by his relatives,  the king 
abandoned  his kingdom  and cam e out of the  well  and thought, 
“He who certainl y retaliat es
Him who harm ed him in peril
And ridiculed  him in m isery
Is a man  without rebirth.”  
Deepl y lost in such thoughts,  the frog king  saw a big  cobra entering  the burrow of a tree  and thought,  “We 
must  set an enem y to fight  an ene my, set a  strong per son to  crush another  strong per son. Their  end will bring 
us happiness.” 
With  this ai m in view, he went to  the burrow and called  the cobra,  “Priyadarsana,  please  come  out.”  
The cobra, however, was careful.  He thought,  “Who is this fellow? He does not seem  to be one  of us. I don’t 
have  any friends outside  my circle.  I will sta y inside and find  out who the caller  is. He could be a  magic ian or 
someone  seeking m y help in  killing  his enem y.” 
Then,  the cobra  shouted from  inside,  “Who are  you, sir?” 
"I am  Gangadatta,  king  of frog s. I have  come  to seek y our help,”  said the  caller.  
“I cannot believe  you. Can there  be friendship  between a  blade  of dry  grass and fire? Haven’t  the learned  said 
that he, who is natural  prey to the predator  never,  even in  a dream,  gets closer to  him?  I cannot trust  your 
words,” said the  cobra. 
“O Priy adarsana,  what I tell  you is true.  You are m y born enem y. But I have com e to you seeking  help to 
avenge  my hum iliation. The learned  have  said, 
“When yo ur life is under threat
When  danger stares y ou in the face
It is better  to bend before  an enem y
And save life  and propert y.” “Who humil iated  you,” asked the  cobra. 
“It is m y relatives.”  
“Where do y ou live? Is it  a well or a  pond or a tank?” 
“It is a well  with stone walls.”  
“But I have no legs.  How can I reach  the well and  kill your enemi es?” 
“Sir, please don’t  say no. I will show yo u how to enter the  well.  There is a  crevice  in the  wall that  opens into 
the well. It’s a  nice hiding  place  for y ou. Come,  I will show yo u,” said Gangadatta,  king of frogs. 
The cobra then  thought,  “I have beco me old. Rarel y can I get  a frog to eat.  This fellow  has come  to give  me a 
new lease  of life.  I will  go with him  and have a  daily  feast  of frogs.” 
Addressing the king  of frog s, the  cobra  said, “Let’s  go.” 
“But there  is a condition,”  said Gangadatta,  “Priyadarsan a, I will  take  you there and  show yo u the place.  But 
you should spare frogs that  are close to me.  You s hould  eat onl y those I select  as food for y ou.” 
The cobra replied,  “You are  now m y friend. I give  you my word. I will  eat only  those marked  by you as m y 
food.”  
The cobra then  emerged  from  its burro w and  accompan ied the king of frogs to the  well.  The frog king 
showed him  the crevice  in the well  and his relatives  who deserved  to be killed.  The cobra  happily  settled  in 
the crevice  and finished  in course  of time  all those frogs their  king had marked  for exterm ination. 
Now, without frogs to eat,  the cobra told  the king,  “I have  destroyed all your enem ies. Now show me  prey for 
food. It  is yo u who brought  me here.”  
Gangadatta  told him,  “You have done  your job to help  me. Now, it  is time  for yo u to leave  this place.”  
“How can I leave?”  protested  the cobra.  “Someone  else will  occupy  my place.  So, I will  not go, I will  stay 
here only . You offer me  one frog every  day from  your circle  of relativ es.” 
Repenting  for m aking  friends  with a natural  enemy, Gangadatta  thought it  was better  to offer the  cobra one 
friend  a da y, remembering the saying that “he who befriends  a stronger enem y invites  certain  death.  A wi se 
man does not lose all  his wealth  to save  a paltr y sum.” Accordingl y, the king of frogs began offering  the cobra  a frog a da y. But the  wicked cobra  swallowed  all the 
frogs. One day , it was the turn of Yamunad atta, son of the king  of frog s. The  king cried  bitterl y over  the loss 
of his son. His wife then told  him that there  was no point  in cr ying over the  past and that  he should 
immediately leave  the place  and look for wa ys to end  the mena ce of the  cobra.  
As day s passed, the  cobra finished  off the  entire  tribe  of frog s with  the exception  of king Gangadatta.  So, he 
asked Gangadatta,  “Look, m y friend, there  is now no frog left  for me  to eat. I a m very hungr y. Show me 
where and  how can  sate m y hunger.” 
The king replied,  “Priyadarsana,  don’t  worry about  food as long as I am  your friend. You get me  out of this 
well.  I will  go and look for wells full  of frogs. I will te mpt them  to come  here and y ou can have y our fill.”  
The cobra said,  “You are  like a brother  to me,  Gangadatta.  I can’t  kill you. But if y ou bring  me food, y ou will 
be as good as m y father.  I will get  you out of this well.”  Thus, the  king cam e out and disappeared.  The cobra 
was eagerl y waiting  for the king  to bring hi m food. When  Gangadatta  failed  to turn  up even after  a long  time, 
the cobra sought the  help  of a chame leon.  
“My friend,  you know Gangadatta  very  well.  Please go to hi m and tell  him that it does not ma tter if he cannot 
bring  me a frog. Let  him come.  I cannot  live without such a trusted  friend.”  
The chame leon carried  the message  of the cobra  to the  king of frogs and told hi m, “Your friend  Priyadarsana 
is eagerl y looking  for y ou to return.”  
Gangadatta  told him,  “Excu se me sir, who can trust  a hungr y man.  You ma y please  go.” 
Concluding  the story , Raktamukh a, the monke y, told the crocodile,  “You wicked creature,  I will never  visit 
your home. ” 
Karala mukha,  the croc,  pleaded  with him,  “My friend, this  is not proper. Please  come  and sanctif y my home. 
Otherwise, I will  be guilt y of ingratitud e. If you don’t co me, I will  fast and die.”  
The monke y said,  “You are an idiot  to think that  I would, like  Lambakarna,  invite  death  knowingly .” 
“O my friend, let  me hear that  story of Lamb akarana, ” asked the  croc. 
Then  the monke y told the croc  the stor y of La mbakarna.  3.The Lion and The Foolish  Donkey  
A lion  named  Karalakesara  was living  in a forest, lo yally served b y Dhoosaraka,  a jackal  that used to 
accompan y the lion  wherever he  went. One day, an elephant  badly  injured the  lion in  a fight.  The injuries 
were so serious that  the lion could  not go out hunting.  As a result, the  jackal also  had to go without  food. 
Both  the mast er and the  servant beca me very  weak. Unable  to bear hunger,  the jackal  pleaded  with the  lion to 
get him some food. 
“You know m y plight.  I cannot  move  out of this place.  However, if  you manage  to lure  some anima l to come 
here,  I will kill  him and both  of us can  have a  good meal, ” said the  lion.  
So, the  jackal  set out  in search of some  anima l and saw a donke y feeding hi mself  on weeds. The  jackal 
approached  him and said, “O  my friend, please  accept  my regards. I have not  seen yo u for a long ti me. You 
have  become  very  weak. What  is the  reason ?” 
The donkey  said in  sad tones, “ How shall  I tell  you my suffering? The washer man  is tormen ting me by 
placing  too much  weight  on m y back.  He does not feed m e at all. I exist on weeds. That  is w hy my body  is 
weak.”  
The jackal  said,  “If that  is the case,  why don’t  you come  with  me?  I shall show you a place  where you can 
have  your heart’s fill  of green  and fresh gras s. We  can happil y spend our ti me there.”  
“You have  given me  good new s. But  there  is a problem.  We are  domestic  anim als and y ou are all wild 
animals.  One of the m will certainl y kill me,”  said the donke y whose nam e was Lambak arna.  
Allaying his fears, the  jackal said,  “O uncle, don’t  say like that. This  place  is in m y control.  Nobod y can enter 
this area. Just like  you are suffering  at the  hands of the washer man,  there  are three  fema le donke ys in this 
area,  which are  waiting  for a suitable  husband. The y are all  young and told  me, “If yo u are reall y our uncle, 
go and  get a suitable  husband for us.” It  is on that  mission  I have co me here  and seen y ou.” 
The donkey  replied,  “If that  is the  case, let’s  go now.” 
That is why  the elders  have said,  
“If the ver y thought  of a woman
Brings ecstas y to a y oung man
How thrilled  would he be?
If he actuall y is in  her presence.”  In the  end, the  jackal  and the  donke y reached  the forest and ca me to the lion.  When La mbakarn a saw the 
ailing  Karalakesara,  the lion,  he began  running away  from  him.  The lion mad e a great  effort  to reach  him and 
strike  him with his paw but failed  to get the  donkey . 
Angry  at the lion’s failure,  Dhoosaraka,  the jackal  protested,  “O my lord, y ou are useless. If y ou cannot 
tackle  a foolish donke y, how can  you fight an  elephant? I have  now realiz ed how po werful  you are.”  
Ashamed,  the lion told the  jackal quietl y, “O my friend,  I was not read y for attack.  Otherwise,  even an 
elephant  cannot  escape  my strike.” 
Satisfied,  the jackal  said,  “All right,  let us forget  the past. I will bring  the donke y here again.  You must  be 
ready and strike  him this time. ” 
“But how can Lamb akarna  forget his experience  and come  back here  again,”  asked the  lion. 
“You leave  it to me, ” said the  jackal and  set off to look  for the donke y. Lambakarn a was there  on the bank of 
a lake feeding  on grass. 
He ca me to the jackal  and said, “F riend,  you have taken  me to a nice  place.  I escaped  death  by inches. Who is 
that animal who had  nearly  killed  me?”  
“You are  mistaken, ” said Dhoosaraka, “It is, after  all, the fem ale donkey  I promised  to take  you to. She was 
getting  up to come  and embra ce you. You ran awa y in scare. She cannot  live without  you and s o was tr ying 
to reach out  to you. She told  me that if you do not marr y her, she would comm it suicide.  So please  come  and 
spare m e the sin of causing the  death  of a w oman. The God of Love  will punish y ou if you do not heed  my 
word.” 
Beguiled,  the donke y followed  the jackal.  The lion  was prepared for the  attack  this time and when the  donkey 
came; he fell  on him  and killed  him instantl y. The lion  asked the  jackal to  keep an e ye on the  donkey ’s body 
and left to  take  a bath in  the river.  Unable to  resist the  tempt ation  of fresh flesh, the  jackal  snipped off the 
ears of the  donke y and scooped  his heart  out and made  a good me al of the m. When  the lion  returned,  he 
noticed  that the ears and heart  of the  donkey  were missing.  
The lion angril y asked  the jackal  to tell  him what had happened  to the  ears and heart  of the  donkey . 
Dhoosaraka told  him that the donke y had no ears and heart.  If he had, he  would not have  come  again.  The 
foolish  lion believed  every  word of the jackal  and shared the  donkey  with  him.  
“So, like  the donkey  in the  story , you too are  a fool,”  said Raktam ukha,  the monke y to Karalamukh a, the 
croc.  
“You have  deceived  me but like  Yudhishtira in  the stor y I am  going to  tell you, you too spoke the  truth when 
you ought  not to and  lost every thing.” “Please tell  me every thing about  this Yudhishtira,”  pleaded  the croc.  
 
4.The Stor y of The Potter 
Once upon a  time,  there  lived  in a village  a potter  named  Yudhishtira.  One da y, he drank a lot  of liquor  and 
got intoxicated  and began running.  He lost his balance  and fell on broken pieces  of a pitcher.  The sharp edges 
of the  pot pieces  cut a big and blood y gash in his forehead.  Somehow,  he got up and  went home.  The wound 
took a long ti me to heal  because he  neglected  to follow the instructions  of the  doctor.  
Suddenl y, a famin e struck the  whole countr y. The potter  left the country  with  some others of the  royal 
household.  In the new countr y, he found a job with the king  of that  country . The king saw the mark  of the big 
wound on his face  and thought  that Yudhishtira  must  have  been a  great  warrior  who suffered  wounds in a 
battle.  The king  began sho wering  special  attention  and affection  on the potter,  which the  king’s son s envied. 
They could not  harm  him because  he wa s the king’s favorite.  
When  every thing was going  smoothl y for the  potter,  a war cam e and the  king was summ oning  all known 
warriors to  honor them  and prepare the m for the  war. The king’s men  were read ying the elephants  and hor ses 
for the  comba t while  the soldiers were  busy staging  rehearsals.  It wa s now ti me for the  king to  know 
everything about  Yudhishtira.  
He sent for the  potter  and asked hi m when no one was around, “W hat is your name,  o warrior ? In what  battle 
were y ou injured?” 
The potter  told the  king, “My  lord,  this is not a wound inflicted  on me  in a battle.  I am  a potter  and my name 
is Yudhishtira.  One day , when I was drunk, I ran and fell  on sharp pieces  of a broken pot. This  scar on m y 
face is the  result of that  fall.”  
Ashamed  that he deceived  himself  by the speech  and garmen ts of the  potter, the  king asked  his s ervants  to 
throw out  the potter.  
But Yudhishtira  appealed  to the king,  “My lord, please  don’t throw me  out. See how well I will  fight.”  
The king said, “I admit  you are a  warrior. But y ou are born in a potter  com munity and hence  cannot  kill an 
elephant.”  
“How is that,”  asked the  potter.  
The king then  told hi m the following stor y. 
A lion  couple lived  in a forest. In course of ti me, the lioness delivered  two lion  cubs. Ever y day, the lion went out and brought food for the  lioness. One day , the lion wandered  all over the  forest in search  of food but 
could  not find  any prey  at all. At s unset, the  lion gave up his search  and wa s returning  home  when he found a 
jackal  cub. The  lion took  a fancy  for him  and took  him home  and gave  him to his wife. 
The lioness asked her husband, “Did yo u get us any  food toda y?” 
“I found this cub. That’s  all,”  said the  lion. 
“I haven’t killed  him because  he is a child.  But if yo u are ver y hungry , you can have  this child  for yo ur 
meal.” 
The lioness was angry  and asked her  husband, “H ow can  I kill  him when y ou spared him  his life?” 
The elders have  said: 
“Don’t do an  unworth y deed
Even  in the  face  of death;
Don’t give  up a worthy  deed
Even  if it means  suicide.”  
“I will treat  him like my third  son,” said the  lioness. 
Thereafter,  the new jackal  cub beca me one of the fam ily and the three  ate, drank, pla yed and slept  together. 
One da y when the y were pla ying, an elephant  passed by. At once, the  two lion cubs got  ready  to attack  the 
elephant.  The jackal  cub told  them  that the  elephant  was an ene my of the  lions and that  it was better  for them 
to leave.  The lion  cubs were disappointed  at the words of their  jackal  brother.  
They went home  and told  their father  the details  of how the jackal  brother fled  from  the scene. The  father  was 
not happy  with his children  and admonished  them. The lion took the jackal  cub aside  and told  him not to 
discourage  the lion cubs who, she said, were his y ounger brothers.  
The jackal  was hurt and asked  his lion moth er, “How am  I different  from  them  in beaut y or education  or 
braver y? Why  should the  two ridicule  me?  I will  kill both of them. ” 
Amused  by the words of the  jackal  cub and  wishing  him long  life, the lioness said,  “You are still  a child.  I 
brought  you up taking  pity on y ou. Your brothers are  also yo ung. Before the y grow old and know that  you 
are different  from  them, leave  this place  and j oin your own folk.”  
Realiz ing the danger ahead,  the jackal  cub left  the lion fam ily in search of his own folk. 
“That’s why , before other  warriors find out that  you do not  belong to the  warrior caste,  leave  this place,”  the king advised Yudhishtira.  The potter  immediately left the palace.  
Rakta mukha,  the monke y, told Karala mukha,  the croc,  “You have tried  to kill me heeding  your wife’s plea. 
But one should never trust  women.  I deserted  my fami ly for the  sake of a woman  and gave her  half of m y 
life. But in the end  she left me to join a la me lover. That’s  why never  trust a woman.”  
“Interesting,”  said the  croc and  asked the monke y to tell  him that story. 
 
5.A Three-in- One Stor y 
Once upon a  time,  there  was a popular king  called  Nanda. His people  respected  him for his learning  and 
valor.  He had a prim e minister called  Vararuchi  who was well versed  in diplom acy and statecraft. 
Vararuchi’s  wife wa s one  day annoy ed with  her husband and kept  away  from  him.  Extrem ely fond of his 
wife,  the prim e minister tried  to please her.  It wa s no use. He did  not know w hat to do to  regain her  affection. 
He pleaded  with  her, “ Tell me what can  I do to make  you happy .” 
The wife at  last opened  her mouth  and said, “S have  your head cleanl y and pro strate  before me  if you want to 
regain  my love.”  
The prime  minister  compl ied with  her wish and succeeded  in winning  back her favour.  
The king’s wife also pla yed the same  drama  of shunning his compan y. Nanda tried  every  trick  he knew to 
win her  affection  without  success. 
When  every thing failed,  the king fell  on her feet  and pra yed her, “ My darling,  I cannot  live without y ou even 
for a while. Tell me what should I do to win back  your love?” 
The queen said,  “I will be  happy  if you pretend  to be  a horse, agree  to be bridled  and to  let me ride you. 
While  racing  you must  neigh like  a horse. Is this acceptab le to you?” 
“Yes,” said  the king  and did, as his wife dem anded.  
Next  day, the king  saw his prim e minister with  a shaven head  and asked him,  “Vararuchi,  why did you have 
your head  shaved  on a da y when tonsure  is forbidden.” Vararuchi  replied,  “O king, is there  anything that a woman  does not demand  and a man  does not readil y 
concede? He would do an ything, shave his head  or neigh  like a  horse.” 
Rakta mukha,  the monke y, then told  Karala mukha,  the croc,  “You wicked  croc, y ou are a slave  of yo ur wife 
like Nanda and  Vararuchi. You tried  to kill  me but y our chatter  gave awa y your plans.”  
That’s  why the learned  have  said, 
“Parrots sing and betra y
Their  presence  to the  hunter.
The crane  eludes the  hunter
By keeping  his beak  tightl y shut.” 
"See how a donke y despite  his disguise in a tiger  skin betra yed his origin  by braying and got killed.  Here  is 
the story  if you want to  know,” said Raktam ukha  and began telling  the stor y of the  donkey . 
In a small  village  lived  a washer man  named  Suddhapata.  He had a  donkey  that was ver y weak because he 
did not feed the  anim al regularl y. One day, the washer man  found the dead  body  of a tiger  while  he was 
collec ting wood from  the forest. Suddhapata  was very  happy  and thought,  “I am lucky . I can  skin the  anima l 
and cover m y donke y with that  skin and drive  it into  wheat  farms  where he will  have plent y to graze. 
Thinking  that he is a  tiger,  people will  keep  away from  him.  This way , my donke y will have  plent y of food.” 
He acted  on his plan  and the  donkey  would go to the  wheat farm  every  evening,  have  his day ’s fill and return 
to his master’s  house in the  morning.  This went on for someti me. The donke y beca me so strong and  sturdy 
that it becam e difficult  for the washer man  to pull  him to the peg  and tie  him to it. 
One da y, when he  was happil y grazing  at the wheat  farm,  the donkey  heard  the voice  of a fem ale donkey  and 
began  to respond to it  in ecstas y. Then the  watchman  and others at  the farm  at once recognized  him as a 
donke y in a tiger  skin and killed  him.  
Rakta mukha  then addressed the  croc and  told hi m, “You have seen  how the  donkey  met his end because  he 
opened  his mouth  where  he should not. Now, will y ou leave  me or do yo u want to m eet with the  same fate as 
Syamalaka?” 
“No, please.  I want to  know the  story  of Sy amalaka,” said Karalamukh a, the croc. Rakta mukha  told him  the 
following  story . 
A very  wealth y merch ant named Eswara lived  in a cit y called  Vikantakapura m. One day , his four son s-in-law 
arrived  from  Ujjain with their  fami lies to enjoy the hospitalit y of their  father- in-law. Es wara  did ever ything 
to make  them happ y and contented.  Six mon ths passed but the sons-in-law did  not sho w an y sign of leaving 
for Uj jain. Eswara  was angr y but could not  directl y tell his sons-in-law that  they had oversta yed. 
One da y, the father- in-law told  his wife, “These gu ys are enjoy ing their  stay here  and are  reluctant  to leave.  I am sure they  will not leave  unless we offend  them  in some way . Tomorrow,  when the y come  for dinner, 
don’t  offer them  water to  wash their  feet.  They  will regard  this as an insult  and will  certainl y leave.”  
Eswara’s wife did,  as her hu sband  wanted her to  do. 
The first son-in-law was offended because  water  was not  ready  for him  to wash his feet and  left in a huff. 
The second son-in-law was not happ y with  the place  assigned  to him  at the  table  and left  ranting.  
The third co mplain ed about  the qualit y of food and packed  his bags. 
Syamalaka, the fourth  son-in- law, however, did not  mind  these  insults and sta yed on. The father- in-law had, 
therefore,  to throw him  out of his hou se by force. 
“I have seen how wicked y ou are and I am  not a fool  to still  trust y ou like the carpenter,”  said Raktamukh a. 
At once  Karalamukh a insisted  on hearing  that stor y. 
 
6.The Carpenter’s Wife 
Once upon a  time,  a carpenter  lived in  a village  with his wife. He had heard  bad stories about  her and wanted 
to know the  truth  about those rumors.  
Next  day, pretending  he was going to the  village  nearby , he told  his wife, “I  have  to leave  the place  early 
morning  tomorrow  for a  village  not far  away  from  here.  I ma y have  to sta y there  for a few da ys. Please  get 
things  ready  for m y travel.”  
The wife’s j oy knew no bounds. S he cooked his favorite  dishes and packed  some  of it  for his travel.  
Next  morning  the carpenter  left. His wife put on her  best clothes,  daubed perfume  on her bod y and thrust 
flowers in  her hair and  spent the rest  of the da y with great  difficult y. 
When  it was dusk, s he went to her lover’s  house and  told hi m, “My  wicked husband has left  for some  place 
and will not  come  back  for a few da ys. So, come  to m y place  after  ever y one has gone to sleep  and we will 
have  a happ y time.”  
After  this invitation,  she returned  home.  
Meanwhile,  the carpenter  spent the  day in a nearby  forest and  came  back before  his wife had returned  from 
her lover’s place.  He hid himself  under a cot.  Soon, his wife’s lover ca me and joined  her. A s the wife was talking  to her lover  on the bed,  her dangling  legs hit  something  hard. She at once  thought  it could  be her 
husband hiding  under the  bed to test  her. 
“I will show m y husband ho w clever  I am,”  she thought.  
When  her lover  moved  close  to her, she told  him through  sign s that  her husband  was under the  bed and said, 
“Sir, yo u should  not touch  me. I am  a very  faithful  wife.  If yo u touch me  I will  turn yo u into ash.” 
“In that case,  why  did yo u invite  me,”  he asked her  angril y. 
“Please listen,  this morning,  I went to  the te mple  of the goddess w here I heard a  divine  voice sa ying, “O 
woman,  I kno w you are my devotee.  But y ou will becom e a widow in six mon ths.” 
Then  I pray ed her to tell  me a way  by which I could  save m y husband and mak e him live for hundred y ears. 
“There is a  way which  is in y our hands,” the  goddes s told  me. 
“If that is so, I would give  my life to save m y husband”,  I told  the goddess. 
She told  me, “If yo u go to bed with  a stranger, the  danger  to yo ur husband’ s life  will shift to  the stranger  who 
will die soon.” 
The foolish carpenter  believed  every  word of his wife and  happy  that he had such a faithful  wife, he cam e out 
of his hiding  and told  her, “O  sacred woman,  I paid heed  to rumors  about  you and doubted  your character.  I 
wanted  to test  you and put y ou on the  wrong track mak ing you believe  I had left  the village.  Now I have  seen 
what  you are. Come,  let us enjoy ,” he said  and embrac ed her. In that  happiness  he carried  his wife and the 
carpenter  on his s houlders  and paraded  the streets  of the village.  
At this  stage Rakta mukha,  the monke y, told Karala mukha,  the croc,  “O wicked croc,  I now know y our evil 
thoughts.  How can I co me to your place? It is y our nature  to be  wicked. Friendship with  good men  will not 
change  your nature.  You are too attach ed to your woman.  You are  her slave.  Such people never  hesitate  to 
lose their wealth  and friends for her sake.” 
As the monke y was telling  this stor y of the  carpenter  to the croc,  someon e from  the sea ca me and told the 
croc that his wife who wa s fasting  had died.  The croc  felt that living  in a house without  a wife was like  living 
in a jungle.  
He told  the monk ey, “Friend,  pardon me.  I have  done y ou harm.  So, I have lost m y wife. I deserve to  die.”  
The monke y said,  “I know yo u are a hen- pecked husband. But  this is no tim e for grief  because y ou are rid of 
a greedy  wife. You must  celebrat e.” The elders have  said:  “Con sider  that evil woman
Who has no character  and
Who alwa ys quarrels with y ou
As a curse in the  form  of a wife.
That man  who wants to  be happy
Should not  even take  her nam e.
He who loves a woman  of vice
Perishes like  a mo th kissing fire.”  
The croc said  in grief, “My  friend,  I have lost  your friendship and  also m y wife. All  this is the  result of 
betra ying a friend like  you. I think  I am  wise. But  it is like  the wisdom  of the foolish  woman who lost her 
lover  and her husband also.”  
“How is it?” asked the  monke y. 
The croc began  telling  him the story . 
There  was an old farm er who had a y oung wife, who alwa ys had other men  on her mind.  She never attended 
to household  jobs. She was alway s looking for y ounger men  to spend ti me. One day, a trickster  saw her and 
seeing  that she was alone  went to  her and pra yed, “O beauty , I am  a widower. The  minute  I saw you I lost  my 
heart  to you. Please  give  me the pleasure of y our compan y.” 
Delighted,  the woman  told him,  “O hand some, my husband has a lot  of wealth.  He is old and of no use to  me. 
I will  bring all  the mone y and jeweller y at home  to you. Let us run awa y to a far off place  and live there 
happil y ever  after.”  
The trickster  was very  happy  and asked her  to bring all  that mone y and gold to  a place  where he would be  
waiting  for her. “We will  then leave  the place  quietl y,” he told  her. 
The farmer’s  wife waited  till it was dark and when her  husband fell  asleep  stole  all the mone y and gold, 
packed  it in a bag  and left  the house at  dawn to mee t the trickster  at a place  he had indicat ed. The trickster 
took the bag full  of mone y and gold from  her on the pretext  that he w ould carry  it and began  their  journe y. 
After  two miles,  they stopped because  there  was a river to  cross. 
The trickster  thought,  “What  do I do with a woman?  If someon e else were to set e yes on her, I have to  protect 
her. It is better  I give  her up but take  the mone y with  me.”  
With  these  thoughts in mind  he told  the woman,  “Look, m y dear, it  is very  difficult  to cross the river.  I will 
first ferry  the mon ey bag to  the other  side of the  river and keeping  it there  I will co me back  and carr y you on 
my back.” 
She said,  “Okay ” and gave  the bag  to the trickster.  He a sked her to give  her clothes  also because  he said 
clothes  would hinder  swimming. She gave  away  her clothes  also. The  trickster  left with the  bag and her 
clothes.  Covering  her naked  body  with her hands, the  woman  began waiting  restlessl y for the trickster  to return.  Just 
then a jackal  with a piece  of me at in his mouth  happened  to pass by. The jackal  saw a fish that  had come  out 
of water  and in tr ying to get  at it he dropped  the me at piece  and ran towards it.  But the  fish, s eeing  the 
rushing jackal,  jumped  back into  water. Disappointed,  the jackal went  back to pick  up the  piece  of meat.  But 
a kite dived  down fast and took  it awa y before  the jackal  could  reach it.  
The woman laughed  at the  jackal  that had  lost the  fish and also the  piece  of meat.  Hurt by  the woman’s 
behavior,  the jackal  said, “Y ou ma y be twice  as intellig ent as I am.  But what  is the use ? You have lost  your 
husband, y our lover  and y our wealth  also.” 
In the  middl e of the  story , some one from  the sea ca me and disturbed Karala mukha  and told hi m that another 
big croc had occupied  his house. The  croc did  not know w hat to do. He had lost  a friend  (Raktamukh a), his 
wife and the house. He began  to wonder how he could throw out  the big  croc from  his hou se. He went  to the 
monke y who had alread y clim bed back  to the  top of the  tree and asked him  for his advice.  
Rakta mukha  told the  croc, “Y ou fool,  why do y ou still bother  me?  You have  tried  to kill  me to make  your 
wife happy . Now, y ou have  come  for advice.  I cannot give  it to such fools like  you who ask for advice  but do 
not follow it.  He w ho does not heed  the advice  of wi se men  will perish like  the camel  at the hands of the 
lion.”  
Without  any shame, the croc asked the  monke y to tell  him that story . The monke y told him the following 
story. 
7.The Price of Indiscret ion 
In the  city of Nagara, there  was a carpenter  whose name  was Ujjwalaka and  who was extrem ely poor. O ne 
day he wa s pained  to realize  that ever y one else in  his profes sion was rich  and happ y and that he  alone  was 
very poor. H e thought  Nagara  was not the  proper place  for hi m to prosper and  that he  must  go out and  seek 
his fortune  elsewhere.  Then he left  that city and began  his j ourne y to a new countr y. When the  sun was 
fading,  he reached  a cave  in a forest. 
There  he saw a fema le camel  that separated  from  her caravan  and just then  delivered  a child.  The carpenter 
gave  up his plans to go to  another  country  and went  home  taking  the came l and her  calf with  him.  Ever y day 
he would go into the  forest and bring  back with hi m bundles of tender  leaves  for the  camel  and her child  to 
eat. The she camel  regained  and her  strength and the  calf now beca me an adult.  The carpenter  began selling 
camel milk  and making  good mone y. 
Ujjwalaka  loved the  came l so much  that he bought a bell  and hung it  to her  neck. One day  he thought  to 
himse lf, “If one  came l can bring so much  mone y for me,  how much  more  would I earn  if I bu y more  came ls 
and sell their  milk?” He told  his wife that  he would borrow some  mone y to go to  Gujarat  and buy  a she cam el 
and that she should take  care  of the  she ca mel and her calf  till he returned  from  Gujarat.  He went to  Gujarat  and returned  home  with  a she came l. Slowl y, the number  of camels  he had increased 
several  times. He appointed  a keeper  to take  care  of the  camel  herd he had  on the condition  that he  would 
give one cam el to the keeper  ever y year as remuner ation.  The keeper  was also free to  drink cam el milk  twice 
a day. Now, ever ything was fine for the  carpenter  and he and his wife thus lived  happil y ever  after.  
The came ls used to go ever y day to a nearb y forest to  feed on the  fresh green leaves  available  in plent y in the 
forest.  After spending  a lot  of tim e in the forest, eating  and play ing, the ca mels  trekked  back  home.  But the 
senior  she ca mel stayed on in  the forest  and j oined  the herd  later.  The other  came ls thought  that the she cam el 
was a fool to  go her separate  way s and what would she do if a  wild anim al attack ed her. 
One da y a lion saw all  the ca mels  leaving  the forest  in a herd and  the she cam el staying back  and loafing 
about.  By the ti me she finished her leisurel y grazing, the  others left  and reached  hom e. The she ca mel lost 
her way and was in panic when the  lion,  which was following  her, pounced  on her and soon tore  her to 
pieces.  
“That’s why  I tell  you that he who does not follow the  advice  of wise men  perishes  like the cam el,” said the 
monke y. 
The croc replied,  “You are  right,  if yo u follow advice  given  for yo ur good yo u will face no danger  either  here 
or in the heaven  above. Yet,  what is great  about doing  good to a person who is good ? He who helps a person  
who has done him  harm  is considered  great  by learned  people.  That’s why  take  pity on m e and give  me 
advice.”  
The monke y said,  “In that  case, y ou go and fight  that big croc  who ha s occupied  your home.  If you die in that 
battle,  you will go to  heaven.  If yo u win the battle,  you will get  back y our house. Know this from  me: 
“Conquer a good man  with humil ity,
Vanquish a hero  with strateg y,
Overcom e the poor through small  gifts
And crush equals with  power.”  
“How is that  possible?” Karala mukha  asked Raktam ukha.  Another  story  begins. 
8.The Jackal’s  Strateg y 
Mahachatarak a was a jackal living  in a forest. One da y, he found the bod y of an elephant  and was happy  that 
it would have food for m any days. However,  he was not able  to bite  into the thick  hide  of the elephant  and 
was circling  around  the bod y when a lion  cam e that way . The jackal  humbl y prostrated  before  the lion and 
said, “My lord,  I am  your obedient  servant.  At y our com mand, I am  keeping  a vigil  on the bod y of the 
elephant.  Please help  yourself.” The lion said,  “You kno w my friend, I do not  eat someth ing others  have killed.  You ma y take it  as m y gift to 
you.” 
“I am  touched  by your magnan imity, my lord,”  said the  jackal. 
After  the lion  had left,  a tiger  cam e on the  scene. The  jackal  thought,  “I got rid  of one mena ce through 
humi lity. How do I escape  this fellow? He will  not yi eld to an y strateg y I know. The onl y way  of keeping 
him at bay is cunning. Let  me try it.” 
The jackal  then  went half  way  to greet  the tiger  and said, “O uncle,  why are you entering  this area  of death? 
The lion has killed  this elephant  and asked me  to keep watch  on it. He has gone to  take  bath. Before  going, he 
told me to inform  him if any tiger  happened to  come  here. He vowed to kill  all the tigers because  long ti me 
ago a tiger  had nibbled  at an  elephant  he had  killed.  He told m e that from  that day he had s worn to  kill all 
tigers.”  
These  words frightened  the tiger.  
He told  the jackal,  “Son, save m y life. When  the lion  comes,  don’t tell him I had come  this wa y. Please.”  
On receiving  an assurance  from  the jackal, the  tiger  hurriedl y left the scene.  Then ca me a leopard. 
The Jackal  thought, “This fellow has strong and sharp teeth.  I will persuade  him to pierce  the hide  of the 
elephant.”  
Addressing the leopard,  the jackal said,  “My son, y ou have  come  this way  after  a long ti me. You seem  to be 
hungr y. Why don’t  you be m y guest? See this bod y of the  elephant  killed  by the lion.  He has asked me  to 
keep  an e ye on the bod y. So, have a  feast before  he returns.” 
The leopard  said, “ Uncle,  how can  I accept  your invitat ion. If I want to  live long I should not touch  this 
elephant.  I will leave  now.” 
The jackal  assured him,  “Don’t worry , you go ahead. I will  alert  you when the  lion com es.” 
The leopard  then began  attacking  the elephant  and when he tore the  hide,  the jackal  cried,  “Run. The lion  is 
coming.”  
In this  way , the jackal  managed  to get  rid of the  leopard also.  
When  the jackal  began feasting  on the  elephant  flesh, another  jackal  came  that way . He w as ver y angr y and 
looked  very  strong. The  first jackal re mem bered the last line  of the  stanza  “crush equals with  power”  and 
attacked  the trespas ser with great  ferocit y and killed  him. Rakta mukha  told Karala mukha,  “In the  manner  of the  jackal in  the stor y, you also kill that encroaching  croc. 
Otherwise, it  will be y our end. But  you must  be war y like Chitranga,  the dog, of yo ur own kith  and kin.”  
“Who is this Chitranga? Can  I learn an ything from  his story ,” asked the  croc. 
“Why  not?” said  the monke y and began  telling  him the stor y of Chitranga.  
Chitranga  was a dog living  in a cit y in the  south visited  by famine  for man y years. Dogs began d ying by the 
hundreds because  there  was no food. There  was a danger that  they would disappear  as species.  So, Chitranga 
left that city and ca me to a far-off cit y in search  of food. There  he found the house of a  wealthy  man who se 
wife was a laz y and careless  woman  who would not close  the doors of the  house. 
Ever y day, Chitranga  would sneak into  the open house and have  his fill.  But he reall y could  not enjoy  his 
food because  as soon a s he came  out of the  house, street mongr els attacked  him and severely  wounded him.  
Chitranga  thought,  “Oh, I made  a mist ake in coming  here. Home  was better  even  if there  was no food. There 
was no struggle like  this for food. Let  me go home. ” 
In the  end, Chitranga  left that city and returned  home.  
Seeing  him return from  abroad,  Chitranga’s  friends asked him,  “Tell us every thing about  the countr y you 
have  visited.  How are  the people  there? What  is their  culture?” 
The dog said, “The less said the  better  about that  countr y. Every thing is freel y available  because  the women 
are careless. Yet  your own kith  and kin  deprive y ou of this  joy.” 
The croc was then i mpressed  by the monke y’s good advice  and decided  to fight  the encroaching  croc.  He 
fought  his enem y with  great  valor and killed  him and regained  the house occupied  by him.  The elders  have 
said:  
“There is no true  happiness in
What  you get without effort.
Even  an old bullock  survives
On food that  comes  his wa y.” 
Thus ended  the dialogue  between  Rakta mukha  and Karalamukh a. With  that ends the fourth  Tantra  of Vishnu 
Sarma.  PART 5: Last Strateg y 
The fifth  strategy  begins with  the following  verse: 
“Whoe ver without  judgment
Does what  the foolish  barber
In this  chapter did
Comes to  eternal  grief.” 
1.Im prudence 
This is the stor y that shows how true is the  above verse.  
Manibhadra  was a merchan t living  in the southern cit y of Pataliputr a. He was a man  of principles  who had 
lost all his w ealth.  His povert y made  him very sad and  one night he  reflected  on his condition  and thought:  
“Neither  character  nor patience
Neither  humi lity nor pedigree
Dispels a poor m an’s gloom.”  
Even  if a m an has meri t, the pres sures of earning  a livelihood  overshadow s uch merit.  The need  to look  after 
the fami ly wears out one’s brillianc e. A poor man’s  house is like  a sky  without stars, a  lake without  water.  
“A poor man  is shunned  even if
He has character  and pedigree.
A wealth y man  shines in  societ y
Without  merit and caste  roots.
What  he does is never  shameful
But to be poor is alwa ys a crime. ” 
After  thinking  a lot about  his condition,  Manibhadra  decided  that death  alone  could solve  his problems.  With 
these  thoughts he fell  asleep  and saw a dream.  In his dream,  a Jain monk  appeared  and said, “O  merch ant, 
don’t  give in to  self-pit y. I am  Padman idhi, the treasure  collected  by your ancestors. Tomorrow  morning 
when I will  visit  you in this guise, y ou will hit my head  with a stick  and I will  turn into  gold. You can live  
happil y ever  after.”  
When  the mer chant  woke up next morning  he wondered whether  what he saw in the  dream  was real  or unreal.  “This ma y not be true. It  could ju st be an illusion  because  I have been  thinking  about mon ey all the 
time,”  he thought  and reme mbered the following  poem:  
“Their drea ms never com e true
Who are  sick, grief  stricken,
Lovelorn  and infatuat ed.” 
Meanwhile,  a barber  came  to the  merchan t’s house because his wife  had called  him for pedicure.  Very  soon 
came the Jain monk  who appeared  in the merch ant’s  dream.  Manibhadra  was happ y to see him  and at  once 
reached  for the  stick and  struck him  on his head. The  monk  turned  into a statue  of gold.  The merch ant then 
gave  clothes  and mone y to the barber  and told  him not to pass this informa tion to any one. 
The barber went  home  and thought,  “if a monk  turns into  gold if  I strike him,  I will invite  all the monks  and 
kill them and I can  have lots  of mone y.” He pa ssed the  night  with great  difficult y. Next  morning  he went to 
the Jain monaster y, went round its  precincts  three ti mes and prostrated  before  the idol of Jinendra  and sang 
the praise of the  Jains thus: 
“Victory  to the  Jain monks
Who keep  lust and  love at  bay
Who turn  the m ind into a desert
Where  desire does not  grow.
Blessed are  the hand s that  worship
The enlightened  Jinendra
And blessed is the  tongue
That praises the  great  Saint.”  
After  this pray er, the barber m et the chief  monk  and knelt  before  him seeking  his blessings. The monk  
blessed hi m and asked  the barber  the reason that  brought  him to the monast ery. The barber pleaded  humbl y 
that the chief  monk  and others should accept  his ho spital ity. 
The chief  monk  said, “O  my son, we are  not Brahmins  who are  invited  home  to be honoured. We  are 
mend icants who visit  Jain homes  and accept  what is necessar y to keep  us alive.  Please  go away  and don’t 
embarrass  me.”  
Disappointed,  the barber said, “O  great  seer, I have  made  all preparations  to receive  you. Yet I cannot press 
you. You will  do w hat you think  is be st.” 
The barber went  home  and kept  a stick  ready  after  checking  the exits of the  house. He went to the  monaster y 
again  and stood there  pleading  with  the monks  to accept  his offerings. Taking  pity on the barber,  the monks 
agreed  to visit  his home.  The elders  have rightl y said:  
“Man beco mes old and infirm,
Loses his hair  and teeth  and
Cannot  even hear  and see properl y.
Ever ything in his bodyDegenerates  but not desire.”  
When  the poor monks  trooped  into his hou se, the  barber  closed all  the exits and began  assaulting  them.  Some 
of the m died  while some  were cry ing with  pain. The  sheriff,  passing by , heard this  comm otion and asked his 
men to im mediately find out  what was happening.  The men  saw what the  barber had  done and presented  him 
before  a magistr ate. The barber  admi tted that he had killed  some  of the monks.  The magistra te ordered  that 
the barber be  impal ed. 
The judges then  said that  no one should do like  the barber without  understanding  the situation  for the  learned 
have  said that  he who does things without  discretion  or prudence  regrets his action  like the Brahmin’s  wife.  
2.The Brah mani and The Mongoose 
In a city in the north  lived  a Brahmin  whose nam e was Deva Sarma.  His wife delivered  a son at the  same 
time as a she-mongoose  gave birth  to a male  child.  The Brahm ani (Brahm in’s wife) adopted  the mongoose’s 
son and began  bringing hi m as she would her own s on. Yet  the Brahm ani never  left her son alone  because 
she did  not trust the  mongoose,  fearing  that she would some day harm  her son. The elders  have said that 
one’s own s on, however  imm oral, ugly, foolish and wicked,  are his parent’s  darling. It  is said that  
“The bonds of a son are stronger than
The bond s of a  friend, father,  or well  wisher.”  
One da y, leaving  for the lake  to bring  water, the  Brahmin’s  wife  told her husband to  keep a watch  on their 
son. Soon, a cobra entered  the house. Fearing  danger to the  son of the Brahm in, the mongoose  attacked  the 
cobra  and killed  him.  Hearing the  footfalls  of his mother  Brahman i, the mongoose,  with a mou th smeared  by 
blood,  went to greet  her. When  the moth er saw the mongoose  with his mouth  oozing blood,  thought that  what 
she had feared  had happened.  Without  a second thought, the  Brahmin’s  wife threw the  pot of water on the  
mongoose  and the mongoose  died as a result.  
Mourning the  death  of the mongoose,  the woman  entered  the house and found that  her child  was soundly 
sleeping  in the  cradle  and also  the cobra  bitten  to pieces  by the mongoose.  The woman  was struck b y grief 
that she had killed  the mongoose  that was like  a son to her. Meanwhile,  her husband returned  and she began 
cursing  him,  “You miser,  you didn’t heed  my word and went out  for alms.  Self- interest  is good. Too much  of 
it will earn a man  the fate of Chakradhara,”  the Brahm ani said.  
“Who is Chakradhara  and what is his stor y?” asked the husband. Following  is his story  as told b y the 
Brahm in’s wife. 
Four y oung Brahmins  were living  in a cit y, suffering  utter povert y. 
Unable  to bear  it, the y thought,  “It is better  to live in a forest where  only  wild ani mals  live and no human beings  than to suffer povert y. Sleeping  on a bed of grass is better  than  leading  forever a  life of w ant and 
suffering.”  
So, the y packed their  bags and set  out in search  of pro sperit y and happiness. The learned  have  alway s said 
that the grief-stricken  man  alway s gives up truth,  relatives,  moth er and even  mother land.  It was no wonder 
that the four Brahmins  left their  place  and after several  sojourns reached  the great  city of Uj jain. The y bathed 
in Sipra river  and went to the  Maha Kaleswar te mple.  When the y emerged  from  the templ e after  the worship 
of Kaleswar, Bhairavananda  Swam i, a sadhu, greeted  them.  All of them  prostrated  before him  in reverence 
and accompan ied him to his mon aster y. 
The Swam iji asked the  young men,  “From where are y ou com ing and where  are y ou going? What brought  
you here?” 
“We are in  search of prosperit y. For u s, it is either  death  or wealth.  You know that  adventurous people  
achieve  their  goals even if  they  have  to sacrifice  their  lives.  Destiny is all- powerful. Still,  nothing  can be 
achieved  without human  effort. Wells,  tanks and  pond s beco me full when it  rains. But man  too brings water 
out of the earth  by digging  deep wells. So, please  show us a wa y to achieve  our goal,”  the Brahm in boys 
pleaded  with  the Swamiji.  
Moved b y their  plight  and deter mination,  the Swamiji  gave  them  four sanctified  tablets  and told the m, “Each 
one of yo u takes a tablet  and travel  towards the  Himala yas. Stop where the  tablet  slips out of y our hand  and 
look at that  spot for treasures.  Dig the treasures  out and bring the m back  home  and be happy .” 
They began their  journey  and after  some  days of travel,  the tablet  dropped  from  the hand of one of the  four 
Brahm ins. They  stopped  there and  after  digging the  earth,  they  found plent y of copper.  The first Brah min 
told the others that  all of them  could min e as much  copper as the y could and take  it home.  The others said, 
“What is there  in copper.  Let’s go ahead.”  The first Brahm in said the y could  go if the y wanted  but he  would 
go home  taking  all the copper  he could  carry . 
The other three  continued  their  journey  till a tablet  dropped to  the ground from  the hand of one  of the three. 
They dug there  and found plent y of silver. The  second Brahmin  suggested that  they should  be happy  with the 
silver  they  found and  go home.  The other two said  he could take  all the silver if  he wanted. The y would, 
however, continue  their  search  for gold. The  second Brahmin,  happy  with what  he had found, took  silver and 
went  home.  
Now, the rem aining  two Brahmins  trekked  some  more  distance  until  a third  tablet  dropped.  The two dug 
there  and found gold.  The third  man  said that gold was better  than copper  and silver  and they  must  now go 
back  because there  was nothing  more  precious  than gold.  The fourth Brahm in did not agree  and replied  that 
he would continue  his search. The  third man  took the  gold and went  home.  
It was now the turn  of the fourth  man.  He was no w tired  and thirsty , and on top of it  he had lost his wa y and 
began  wandering ai mlessl y. Then  he saw a man  comple tely soaked  in blood  and a wheel  whirring  over his 
head  like a halo.  The Brahmin  went near  him and asked, “ Sir, who are y ou and what is this wheel  over yo ur 
head? Can y ou show me  a place  where  water is availabl e?” As he finished  his questions, the  wheel shifted 
from  the stranger’s head  and cam e over the  Brahmin’s  head.  Then  followed a  dialogue:  
“What is this  wheel which has com e over m y head,” asked  the Brahm in. 
“I have no idea.  It torm ented  me as it  is doing to  you now,” the  stranger  said. 
“At least tell  me how I can get  rid of it.  It is so painful.”  
“If any  person like  you with a tablet  comes  here  and talks  to yo u, the wheel  will shift on to his head.”  
“How long have  you been bearing  this hurt,”  asked the  Brahmin.  
“I have no idea.  But I think  it was in the  reign  of Lord Rama, ” said the  stranger. 
“Who gave y ou food and water?” 
“This place  is where Kubera has stored all  his wealth.  Those who trespass on this area  will have no thirst  or 
hunger  but a lot  of pain inflict ed by this wheel.  Only  such persons w ho have  a magi c tablet  like you had can 
come here,”  said the  stranger and took  leave  of the Brah min. 
When  the last  Brahmin,  whose nam e was Chakradhara,  did not return,  his friend  Suvarnasiddhi  went back 
following  the trail left by his friend and  found him  bleeding  and in great  pain with  a wheel over  his head. He 
asked hi m how he got into  that plight.  Chakradhara  told him what  had happened  so far. 
Suvarnasiddhi  then said,  “ I told  you in man y ways not to  be greed y. You did  not heed m y word. You are 
learned  but not wise. Wisdom  is alwa ys superior  to learning.  Foolish people  perish  like the  Brahmin  boys 
who brought the  lion to life.”  
“How is that?” asked Chakradhara.  
3. 
The Lion T hat Sprang to Life 
Four friends lived  in a cit y. Three of the m were  very  learned  in all  sciences  but had no com mon sense. The 
fourth  boy named  Subuddhi  was not well- versed in  scriptures  or sciences  but had a  fund of comm on sense. 
One da y all of the m thought  that there  was no use of their  learning  unless it  brought the m mone y to live 
happil y. Therefore,  they decided  to go out  and seek the  patronage  of kings. They  set out  to mee t patrons of learning.  
On the  way, the eldest  of them  pointing  out to the  fourth man  told the others, “F riends,  this fellow  is an 
unletter ed fool. He has com mon sense and nothing  else. I am  not going  to share m y earnings  with this  fellow. 
Let him go home.”  
The second man  also s upported  the eldest bo y’s suggestion. 
But the third  boy said, “F riends, it  is not proper  to send him  back. We pla yed together  and he is one of us. Let  
us share our gains with  him because  elders  have said:  
“He who has a narrow mind
Thinks  this is mine,  this is his.
To a large- hearted  person
The whole world is his fami ly.” 
In the  end, the  other two agreed  with the  third  boy’s suggestion and  let the com mon sense man  accompan y 
them. As they  continued  to travel  they  reached  a forest where the y saw a heap  of bones. One of them  told the 
rest, “Look, here  is an opportunit y to test  our learning.  Some  animal is dead. Let  us bring it  to life  using the 
knowledge  we have acquired.”  
The first man  said, “ Okay , I will  use my learning  to assemb le the bones into a  skeleton.”  With  the power of 
learning  he ordered all  the bones to come  together  and beco me a skeleton.  
When  the skeleton  was ready , the second man  comm anded  flesh and blood  to fill  the skeleton  and s kin to 
cover  it. 
When  the third  man  was about  to bring life  to the bod y, Subuddhi, who had onl y comm on sense, warned hi m, 
“Look, this looks like  the body  of a lion.  If it com es to life,  he will  kill all of us.” 
The man  who was to put life  into the bod y of the  anim al told Subuddhi, “Y ou are  a fool. Do yo u think  I will 
lose this opportunit y to test  my learning.”  
Subuddhi then  told him to wait so that  he could  climb  up a tree  for safety  and went up a tree.  When the  first 
man gave hi m life, the lion ca me alive  and killed  all the three  learned  men.  
Suvarnabuddhi  continued,  That’s wh y I have  alway s said: 
“Even if one  is very  learned
If he is without com mon sense
Beco mes the butt of ridicule
Like the learned  in this  story .” “What is that  story? Please  tell me,”  asked Chakradhara.  Suvarnasiddhi  began to  tell the stor y. 
There  lived  four yo ung Brahmin  boys in a cit y. They were good friends eager  to go out and  acquire 
knowledge.  They  went  to a place  called  Kany akubj.  They joined  a monaster y and began  study ing sciences 
and scriptures.  After twelve  years of learning  they thought  it was tim e to go home  and asked  their guru for 
perm ission  to leave  the monaster y. After taking  his permission,  they started  their  homeward  journey . 
After  a few day s of travel,  they  reached  a point where the  road forked.  They  were not  sure which  road would 
take them home.  Then the y saw a funeral procession.  One of the  boys opened his book of learning  and read 
out “Follow the  path taken  by great  men.”  
The boy told his other  friends, “Let us join and follow these  great  men  leading  the funeral  procession.” 
They thus followed the  procession to the  crem ation  ground w here they met a donkey . 
The second Brahmin  boy opened his book of shastras and found this  verse in it:  
“He who comes  to yo ur aid
In times of danger,  famine,
Crem ation  and invasion
Is trul y a friend in  deed.”  
Then  he told  his friends that  the donke y was, therefore,  their  best friend. At once  one of them  held on to  the 
neck  of the donke y. Another  washed his feet.  After this cere mony, they looked around  and found a cam el. 
The four of them  began figuring  out what the  anim al is. The third  man  opened  his book of kno wledge  and 
read out, “What moves  fast is righteousness” and decided  that the came l must  be the e mbodim ent of 
righteousness. 
The fourth man  referred to  his book and found that  righteousness and friendship  should alway s be together. 
They then tied  the donkey  and the  cam el together.  Informed  of this, the  donke y’s owner ru shed to beat  the 
four Brahm ins. But the y escaped before  he ca me. They continued  to travel  till they  reached  a river and found 
a big leaf  floating  over the  water. 
One of the m saw it and,  remem bering a line from  a verse describing  how a leaf  helped  a man  cross the  river, 
jumped  on it  and was being carried  down b y the current.  A second Brahm in saw his friend in  distress and 
remembered  a verse:  
“When total  loss stares in the  face
A wise man  sacrifices  half and
Manages with  what rema ins.” 
So, with a  view to save half  of his friend,  the second Brahm in cut off the head  of the drowning m an. The remain ing three  resumed  their  travel  only  to stop when three  villagers  invited  them  for a  feast. When  the 
host served a  dish resembling  noodles to the  first Brahm in, he thought “w hat is long should be discarded”  
and left the  place  without  food. 
The second man  was served pancakes.  He thought,  “What  spreads is not  good for health”  and refused  to eat.  
Doughnuts were served to  the third  Brahmin.  He reme mbered that “There is peril  where there  is a hole”  and 
left. The three  Brahmins  later  went  home.  
Suvarnasiddhi  ended the  story  and turned  to Chakradhara  and told  him: 
“Even if one  is very  learned
If he is without com mon sense
Beco mes the butt of ridicule
Like the learned  in this  story .” 
Chakradhara  protested,  “That is not  true,” and  quoted this  verse: 
“What God chooses to save
Survives sans human  effort  and
No human  effort can  save
What  God ordains to perish.”  
As the frog said, “the one  with thousand tricks  sat on the  head of the  fisherman,  the one with  hundred tricks 
is hanging  by the fisher man’s  arm and I with onl y one trick  am happil y swimm ing in the  water.” 
“How is that?” asked Suvarnasiddhi.  Chakradhara  begins the  story . 
4.The T ale of T wo Fish  and a F rog 
Two fish nam ed Sahasrabuddhi  and Satabuddhi  made  a lake  their  home.  They had a frog as a friend  who se 
name was Ekabuddhi.  Every  day, they used to me et on the  bank of the  lake  and discuss every thing under the 
sun and disperse at  sunset. One day , they saw some  fisher men equipped  with nets  and each  carry ing a basket 
full of fish cam e that way  and saw the lake  and noticed  that it  was full of good fish. The y told themselves  that 
they should come  early the next  morning  and bait the fish. 
The fish heard their  conversation  and were very  worried. Then  the frog asked Satabuddhi  for advice.  
“O Satabuddhi,  you have  heard what the  fishermen  were planning.  Now tell  us what we should do. Should  we rem ain in the lake  or go somewhere  else.” 
Sahsrabuddhi  answered  the question,  “Don’t worry . You should not  be scared b y just words. The  learned 
have  said “The w orld is still  safe because  the drea ms of snakes  and wicked men  never com e true.”  The 
fisherm en may not even  come  tomorrow.  If they  com e, I am  here to  save you.” 
Satabuddhi  said, “Y ou are  a genius. What  you say is correct.  There  is nothing  that acco mplished  men  cannot 
conquer.  Reme mber how Chanaky a had killed  all the armed  Nandas. 
“Where one cannot  pierce  sun and wind
The wits of a resourceful  man  enter.
One should not  leave  motherl and, for,
Nothing  is happier than  one’s own land.” 
Then,  Ekabuddhi,  the frog, said,  “Friends, flight  is the onl y thing I know. So, I and m y wife  will leave  this 
place  tonight  itself.”  
Accordingl y, the frog left  the lake  immediately. Next da y, the fishermen  came  and netted  lot of fish, frogs, 
crabs, turtles  etc. and also  Satabuddhi  and Sahasrabuddhi and  killed  all of them.  One of them  carried 
Satabuddhi  on his head  because he  was heavier  and slung Sah srabuddhi  to his arm  because he  was long.  
Ekabuddhi  showed this scene  to his wife and said,  “Didn’t I tell  you what  the fisherm en will do? No w, see 
the plight  of Satabuddhi  and Sahasrabuddhi.”  
At the  end, Chakradhara  said, “O  Suvarnasiddhi,  you said that  wisdom  is superior to  knowledge.  But I sa y 
that wisdom  alone  without  education  does not serve  any purpo se.” 
“True,” said  Suvarnasiddhi.  “But it is not  wise to rule  out the advice  of a friend. Greed  made  you ignore  my 
advice.  Haven’t  you heard how the  donkey  ignored the  advice  of the  jackal  and got  a mil lstone  around his 
neck?” 
There  was a donkey  named  Uddhata living  in a village,  carry ing clothes  and other  burdens for his master.  At 
night  when there  was no work, he used to trespass into  farms  outside  the village  and would come  home  at 
dawn for fear  of as sault  by farm  owners. One da y Uddhata  happened  to mee t a jackal  in a farm  outside  the 
village  and both soon beca me friends.  
Ever y night  they  would go together  to the cucu mber  farms  and s umptuousl y feed  on cucumber.  At dawn, 
they would go home  after  they had their  fill. One day , in a happy  mood,  the donkey  told the jackal,  “My son, 
look,  how pleasantl y serene the  night is. It  inspires me  to sing. Tell  me what raaga  would you like me to 
begin  with ?” 
The jackal  said,  “Uncle, why  do yo u unnecessaril y invite  a peril?  We have co me here  to stealthil y rampag e 
cucu mber  crop.  Pimps  and thieves  must  alwa ys observe silence.  Haven’t  the learned  said: “He who cannot  control  cough
Or cannot  keep sleep  at ba y
Or cannot  resist good food
Should not  burgle a  house.” 
“Your music  has no melod y. One can hear  it like  a tru mpet  from  a mi le. The watchm en here  are asleep.  If 
your music  wakes them,  they  will either  impound  us or kill  us. So, give up that  bright  idea  and let  us eat these 
sweet cucu mbers.”  
“You stupid  child, y ou live in the wilderness. That’s  why  you don’t know to enjoy musi c. It is onl y the ver y 
lucky people  who are  destined  to listen  to music  sung in moonligh t,” said Uddhata.  
The jackal  replied,  “True. But  you do not know w hat is music.  You know only  to bra y loudly . So, please  give 
up your foolish  idea.”  
The donkey  was angry  and retorted,  “You are  an idiot  to sa y that I don’t know music.  Sage Bharata  was the 
author  of music,  which  is regarded as the  fifth  Veda with hundred and  eight y-five notational  patterns.  To 
Gods, nothing is dearer  than  music.  It is through music  that Ravana  won favours from  Lord Shiva.  “ 
The jackal  said,  “All right  uncle,  let me first get  out of this  farm  and keep a watch  outside to  alert  you if 
anyone comes  this way . You can  then leisurel y sing to  your heart’s content.”  The jackal  then left  the scene 
quietl y. 
The mom ent the donkey  began singing,  one of the  watchmen woke up and struck it  with a stick  till he 
dropped  to the ground. The  watchm an then  brought an old  millston e and hung it  to the  donkey ’s neck. The 
donke y soon recovered  from  the blows the watch man showered on him  and man aged  to run with the 
millstone  around his neck.  
The jackal  saw his plight  and said, “Y ou haven’t  paid  heed to m y advice.  See how yo u have got  a mil lstone 
around  your neck.” 
After  he finished this  story , Suvarnasiddhi  said,  “Friend, y ou haven’t  cared  to listen  to me. ” 
Chakradhara  agreed  with hi m and said,  “What  you say is true.  The learned  have said:  
“He who has no wits of his own
Or does not heed  advice  of friends
Perishes like  the weaver, Mandhara.”  
On Suvarnasiddhi  showing interest,  Chakradhara  began  Mandharaka’s stor y. 5.The Stor y of The W eaver 
There  was a weaver called  Mandharaka in  a southern cit y. One da y, when he was weaving  clothes, the 
wooden fram es necessary  for weaving  were totall y dam aged.  He went  to the forest  to bring wood to mak e 
new fram es. From the forest  he drifted  towards the seashore where  he sa w a gigantic  tree and thought  that if 
he could cut  wood from  the tree  it would stand him  in good stead  throughout his life.  
As he started  to cut  the tree,  a Yaksha living  on that  tree said, “O  weaver, this  tree is m y home.  So I have  to 
protect  it. I am  very  comfort able here enjoy ing the cool breeze  com ing from  the sea.”  
Mandharaka  said, “Sir, If I do not cut the  tree and take  home  its wood, m y fami ly will starve and  die. So, 
please  go somewhere  else.  I have to  cut this  tree.”  
“All right,  if yo u do not cut  the tree,  I will  give y ou a boon of yo ur choice,”  said the  Yak sha. 
The weaver said, “Sir, in that  case, I will  go home  and consult  my wife and friends.  You can  give me  the 
boon later.”  
On the  Yaksha agreeing  to it, Mandharaka  went home  and on his wa y he me t his friend  who w as a barber  and 
asked hi m, “Friend,  a Yaksha has given me  a boon of m y choice  and gave me  time to consult  friends and  my 
wife.  What boon do y ou want  me to ask hi m?” 
“Ask him  to give y ou a kingdom.  You will  be the  king and I will  be y our minister.  Both  of us can  enjoy life 
here and hereafter,”  said the barber.  
“True. But let  me ask m y wife also,”  said Mandharaka.  The barber  warned the  weaver  against  consulting  his 
wife and said quoting  learned  people:  
“A wise man  can give  to his woman
Fine clothes, pearls  and dia monds;
But never consult  her on his affairs
Because  women  have  low wits.” 
And as Shankarachar ya said that  home  that is run by  women or children  or tricksters  will meet  ruin in  the 
end.”  
The weaver gentl y ignored  the advice  of the  barber sa ying that he would nevertheless  consult his wife  and 
went  home.  He told  his wife the  whole story  of the Yaksha and the  boon he had  offered. Mandharaka  also told  his wife that  his friend,  the barber,  had advised hi m to ask for a  kingdom.  His wife 
said, “O my lord, how intelligen t is a barber ? Never listen  to his w ord. No wise man  would consult  children 
or barbers or servants  or beggars. Al so, 
“King ship has too  man y proble ms;
Conspiracies  take  away  your peace.
With  the crown come  not only  thorns
But also sinister plots  and treason.
It was for the  sake of kingdom
Lord  Rama  lived  in the woods,
Pandava  brothers fled  into exile,
The Yadava d ynasty disappeared,
King Nala  embrac ed anon ymity.” 
“Therefore,  no wi se man will invite  kingship that  leads  to killing  brothers,  friends and relatives,”  said the 
weaver’s wife.  
The weaver replied,  “My  dear,  what you say is true.  But yo u haven’t  told me  what boon I should choose.”  
The wife said, “Every  day you are able  to weave a  single piece  of cloth.  That’s  barel y enough to mee t our 
daily needs. Therefore  ask the  Yak sha to give  you another head  and two more  hands. That  helps yo u to 
weave  two pieces of cloth  ever y day instead  of one. The  first piece  will help us mee t our dail y needs. The 
second one  will help  us meet  special  needs. We can  sail through life  comfortab ly and happily .” 
The weaver was happy  with the  advice  his wife gave  and went to  the Yaksha and pra yed to him,  “Sir, y ou 
have  kindly  given  me a choice.  I request y ou to give me  two more  hand s and  an extra  head.”  
At once,  he had four hands and two heads.  Happily , he began  his homeward  journey . On the wa y people  saw 
him and mist aking  him for some  monster  ham mered him with sticks  and stones. The poor weaver  died on the 
spot, 
Chakradhara  continued,  “That’s why , as I have said earlier : 
“He who has no wits of his own
Or does not heed  advice  of friends
Perishes like  the weaver, Mandhara.”  
“When the  devil of greed  dances on their  head,  people  will beco me objects of ridicule  like me.”  The elders 
have  said: 
“He who covets  the impossibl e
Or builds castles  in the  air
Comes  to certain  grief  like
Poor Soma  Sarma’s  father.”  Suvarnasiddhi  asked him  how. Chakradhara  tells  him the following stor y about  Soma  Sarma’s  father.  
6.The Miserly F ather  
Swabhavakripan  was a Brahmin  living  in a cit y in the south. He was kno wn for his m iserliness.  Ever y day, 
he would go out begging and  save some  corn flour  people  gave him  as alms.  He stored such flour  in an 
earthen  pot and when it  was full  he hung the  pot to a  peg above his bed  so that  he could  keep an  eye on it.  
He returned  home  one day  very tired  and went to sleep  and began drea ming:  “This pot  is full of flour  and if 
there  is a fam ine it would fetch  me a very  high price.  With  that mone y, I will bu y two she goats that  in course 
of time will beco me a big herd. I will  sell the m for a  huge profit and  buy cow s with  that mone y. Then  I will 
buy buffaloes  and later  horses. A nd, when the  stables are  full of hor ses I will  sell the m and buy lots of gold.”  
“With this  gold, I will  build a  huge house with four floors. Seeing  my riches  one Brahmin  will offer  the hand 
of his beautiful  daughter  to me.  She will soon deliver  a son and I will  name  him Soma  Sarma.  When  he is a 
year old, I will  go and hide  in the  stable and  call out to hi m to find  me out. But the  son drifts  dangerously 
towards the  horses. I shout at  my wife  to come  and take  him away. Busy with  domestic  chores she ignores  
my call.  Then I shall  kick her.”  
The dream  shattered  when he kicked  the pot  of flour hanging  from  the peg  and spilled  all its contents  over his 
body. He now looked like  a white ghost. 
Chakradhara  resumed,  “That is why , I said: 
“He who covets  the impossibl e
Or builds castles  in the  air
Comes  to certain  grief  like
Poor Soma  Sarma’s  father.”  
“I don ’t see any thing in this  to blam e you,” said Suvarnasiddhi.  “Every  one beco mes a slave  to greed.  As the 
learned  have  said, 
  
“He who is overwhelm ed by greed
And doesn’t weigh its  consequences,
Will beco me a victim  of deceit
Like King Chandra  in this stor y.” 
Suvarnasiddhi  then told  the story  of King Chandra to  Chakradhara.  Once upon a  time  there  was a king named  Chandra ruling  a smal l state.  His children  were fond of pla ying 
with monke ys. So the king  ordered a number  of monke ys to be  brought to the  palace  and asked his servants 
to feed the m well  and look after  their  needs. The  leader  of the monke ys was an old  scholar well  versed in 
statecraft,  speciall y the work s of Sukrachar ya, Brihaspati  and Chanak ya. The old monke y trained  the y ounger 
ones also in  statecraft.  
The king had a  stable of goats  that his yo ung sons used to ride.  One of the goats  was fond of food and would  
daily sneak into  the kitchen  at an y time  of the da y and make  a clean  sweep of whatever  was availab le in the 
kitchen.  If the  cook chanced  to see him  stealing  food, he would throw at it  whatever  was hand y, a stick  or a 
brass pot. 
The monke y leader  saw this dram a between  the cook and the  wily  goat  and thought:  “I am sure this tussle 
between  the cook and the  goat will  lead  to the  ruin of m y tribe.  This  goat has becom e a slave  to food. The 
cook  will throw at  it whatever  is nearb y. It ma y be a stick  or if it  is not readil y availabl e he m ay use an emb er 
from  the hearth  to throw at  the goat. This will  set ablaze  the goat’s fur-covered  body mak ing him run into the 
stable  that would soon catch  fire and  burn the horses. The great  veterinari an Salihotra  has said  the fat  of 
monke ys is the best med icine for burns. That  will be  the end of monke ys.” 
The monke y leader  then  summ oned  all the y ounger ones and  told the m that the feud between  the cook and 
the goat would certain ly do harm  to the m. In their  own interest  they  should leave  the palace  as earl y as 
possible.  He quoted  the scholars say ing: 
“He who wants to live  in peace
Must leave  a house of dail y strife.
Conflict  breaks up kingdoms
Like bad words separate  friends” 
The younger ones, however, refused to  listen  to the advice  of the old monk ey. They told the  leader,  “Sir, y ou 
have  become  old and senile.  We are not  going to leave  this palace  where we have  the best food availab le. 
What  do we get  there to  eat in the jungles ? We  cannot  eat the  indifferent  food in  the forest.”  
Extre mely unhapp y at their  respon se, the old  monke y said, “Y ou have  no idea  of the price  you will pay for 
the comforts  of the  palace.  They won ’t last long.  I cannot  see the end  of our tribe. I a m leaving.  He who 
spares himse lf the spectacl e of a friend  in distress, of his house occupied  by an enem y or of the  division  of 
his countr y, is the happiest.”  
The old monke y left all of them  with  a heav y heart. 
Some  days later,  the wil y goat entered  the royal kitchen  and the cook,  failing  to see an ything hand y to punish 
it, took out  a burning piece  of wood from  the hearth  and hurled  it at the goat.  His fur afire, he  ran in panic 
into the stable where  his burning body  set ablaze  the hay stacked  there.  Several  horses perished  in the  fire. 
The king consulted  expert  veterinarians  who advised  him to use monke y fat as unguent for horses s uffering 
from  burn s. 
The king ordered  all monke ys to be killed  and their  fat used to  heal the  burns of the horses. The old  monke y was distressed b y the death of her  progeny  and began  planning  as to how he could take  revenge  on the  king 
for killing  all monke ys. Wandering  restlessly  in the forest, the  old monke y saw a lake  full of lotuses.  On 
deeper  inspection  of the  lake,  the senior monk ey found footprints  of anima ls and human  beings entering  the 
lake but not  footprints leaving  the lake.  
The monke y at once realiz ed that there  must  be some  wicked crocodile  in the  lake and  that it was better  to 
drink  water with the  tube  of a lotus. As he began drinking  water, a  monster  emerged  from  the lake  wearing  a 
pearl  necklace.  The monster  addressed the monk ey and said,  “You seem  to be  an intelligen t chap.  You drank 
water  without entering  the lake.  I am  impressed  by the presence of y our mind. Ask anything you want.”  
The monke y asked,  “Sir, how man y lives  can y ou take  in one  go?” 
The monster  said,  “I can swallow tens,  hundred s and  thousands at one ti me. All this I can  do only  when the y 
enter  the lake.  Outside  the water,  even a  jackal  can challenge  me.” 
The monke y said,  “I have to  settle  scores with a king.  If yo u can lend  me the pearl  necklace  on y our body, I 
will somehow  persuade the  king and all  his men  to enter  the lake  for hidden wealth.  Then y ou can kill all of 
them.” 
Trusting  the monk ey, the monster  gave  him the pearl  necklace.  The monke y reached  the kingdom  of 
Chandra.  People saw the  dazzling  necklace  and asked him  how he  got it.  The monke y told the m about  the 
lake.  When  the word reached  the king,  he sent for the  monke y and asked him  how he got  the necklace.  
On the  monke y telling  him ever ything about the  lake,  the king, led  by the monke y, and acco mpan ied by his 
family, ministers  and followers, reached  the lake. The  monke y told the king that  it was better  that all his men 
entered  the lake  at the  same  time at dawn. But  the monke y told the  king, “My  lord,  you will not  go with 
them. I will  take  you separatel y to a spot where you can get  a large  store of pearl  necklaces.”  
According  to the  plan, all  the king’s men  entered  the lake  at the  same  time and were killed  by the monster. 
When  nobody  came  out of the  water for a long  time, the king becam e suspicious and asked  the monke y about 
the dela y in his men  coming  out of the lake.  The monke y immediately sprang to the  top of a  tree and  told the 
king:  
“O king,  the monster  inside the  lake  has killed  all your people.  You have  killed  my people.  This is m y reply 
to that treacher y.” 
Suvarnasiddhi  concluded  the story  by repeating  the earlier  verse: 
“He who is overwhelm ed by greed
And doesn’t weigh its  consequences,
Will beco me a victim  of deceit
Like King Chandra  in this stor y.” Suvarnasiddhi  then asked  Chakradhara  for permission  to leave.  Chakradhara  said that  it was not good to 
desert  a friend  in distress. 
Suvarnasiddhi  said, “What y ou say is true.  Yet, it  is alway s better  to do according  to what the wise men 
advise.  Otherwise, I will  have to repent  later  like you. As the learned  have  said, “Tho se who are  not united 
will perish like  the great  bird which had two heads  on a single torso but  ate different  fruits.” 
On Chakradhara’s  request Suvarnasiddhi  began telling  that story . 
7.Tale Of  The Bird With T wo Heads  
A great  bird named  Bharunda lived  on the  banks of alake.  He had two heads but  a single bod y. One da y, as 
the bird was wandering on the  bank of the  lake,  he found a fruit,  which was a s delicious  as ambrosia.  One of 
his heads mu mbled, “Oh w hat a fruit.  I am  sure the  heavens have  sent it  for me.  I am  so lucky .” 
Hearing  this, the  second head said,  “O brother, let  me also taste  the fruit  you are praising  so much.”  
The first head  laughed and  said, “ Both  of us have  the same  stomach.  It makes  no difference  whether  I eat  it 
or you eat it. I shall give  it to our beloved.  She will be  very  happy .” Bharunda  thus gave the  fruit  to his wife. 
The second head was disappointed  at this action  of the  first head.  
One da y, the second head  found a poisonous fruit and  told the  first head,  “You treacherous  fellow. For what 
you have  done to me,  I will  eat this  poisonou s fruit  and avenge  your insult.”  
The second head said,  “You fool, if y ou eat that,  both of us will  die because  we have the  same  body.” 
Ignoring  his warning, the second  head ate  the poisonou s fruit  and both of the m died.  
After  listening  to the  story , Chakradhara  said, “ Friend,  what you say is true. You can go hom e but don’t  go 
alone.  Haven’t  our elders said:  
“Alone, do not eat  delicious  food,
Do not sleep  when others are awake,
Neither  should y ou travel  alone
Nor ponder alone  over ma tters.”  
“See ho w the  Brahmin  has survived because  he had heeded  his mother’s  advice  and took a crab  as his 
traveling  companion. ” “How wa s that?”  asked Suvarnasiddhi.  
Brahm adatta was a Brahm in boy living  in a city with his old moth er. One da y, when he was planning  to 
travel  to another  village,  his moth er told him not to travel  alone  but take  someone  with him.  The bo y said that 
the way  to the  village  was safe and that  he was leaving  on an urgent  business. H e asked  her not to  be afraid.  
Knowing that  he was determ ined to go, the mo ther went  to the well  in the  backy ard and took out  a crab and 
asked his son to keep  the crab with hi m during his travel.  The bo y then  put the  crab in a  camphor  box and  put 
that box in  a ves sel and set out  on his j ourne y. That  being  summ er, the day was very  hot and  the Brahm in 
halted  and took rest under  a big tree.  
From  the hollow of the  tree,  a snake emerg ed and, attrac ted by the fragrance  of camphor,  swallowed  the box 
containing  the crab.  The crab  came  out of the  box and sliced  the head of the  snake  and killed  him.  The 
Brahm in boy woke and found the  dead snake  and the ca mphor  box. When  he saw the crab  coming  out of the 
box alive,  he at once  realized  what  had happened.  
He then  reme mbered the word s of his mo ther and thought he did  well b y heeding  her advice  that saved  him 
from  death. He also  recalled  the word s of the  elders:  
“Tho se who feed  on the rich
Do not help  them  in distress.
When  their  wealth is in  tact
Ever yone hovers around the  rich.”  
Chakradhara  concluded  his stor y telling  Suvarnasiddhi  how impor tant to alwa ys have  a compan ion. He then 
agreed  to Suvarnasiddhi  taking  leave  of him.  
Thus ends the fifth  strategy  Vishnu Sharman na rrated  to the  sons of Amarashakti.  